--- 01.pdf Page 1 ---
Chapter VIII

Descriptions of Subjects

Refer to the introductory pages in this
chapter for a list of departments and
programs by Course and by School. Also,
these pages explain how to decipher the
abbreviations in the subject listings which
follow.

Chapter VIII lists subjects department by
department in numerical order by Course.
Programs identified by letter abbreviations
appear at the end of the numbered Courses.
Guide to Departments and 298
Course Numbers

Guide to Subject Listings 299
Descriptions of Subjects 300

Course 1
Civil and Environmental Engineering

Course 2
Mechanical Engineering

Course 3
Materials Science and Engineering

Course 4
Architecture

Course 5
Chemistry

Course 6
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science

Course 7
Biology

Course 8
Physics

Course 9
Brain and Cognitive Sciences

Course 10
Chemical Engineering

Course 11
Urban Studies and Planning

Course 12
Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences

Course 13
Ocean Engineering

Course 14
Economics

Course 15
Management

Course 16
Aeronautics and Astronautics

Course 17
Political Science

Course 18
Mathematics

Course 20
Program in Applied Biological Sciences

Course 21
Humanities

Course 21A
Anthropology/Archaeology

Course 21F
Foreign Languages and Literatures

Course 21H
History

Course 21L
Literature

Course 21M
Music

Course 21W
Program in Writing and Humanistic Studies

Course 22
Nuclear Engineering

Course 24
Linguistics and Philosophy

HST
Health Sciences and Technology

MAS
Media Arts and Sciences

SP
Special Programs

STS
Science, Technology, and Society

SWE
Engineering School-Wide Electives

TOX
Division of Toxicology

TPP
Technology and Policy

ROTC
ROTC Programs

Descriptions of Subjects

297


--- 01.pdf Page 2 ---
Explanatory Notes

Guide to Departments and
Course Numbers

Departments/Programs by Course

Departments/Programs by School

Chapter VIII of the catalogue contains descrip-
tions of the subjects offered by MIT’s depart-
ments and programs. The subjects are listed in
numerical order by their Course numbers; let-
ter-designated programs appear after the
departmental listings.

In general, at the Institute, the word Course
(capitalized) refers to an organized curriculum
leading to a specified degree. The word
course (lower-case) or subject refers to the in-
dividual class. Each Course is designated by a
number or letter abbreviation; each individual
subject offered by a Course is also numbered.

Course1 Civil and Environmental
Engineering
Mechanical Engineering
Materials Science and Engineering
Architecture
Chemistry
Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
Course7 Biology
Course 8 Physics
Course9 _ Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Course 10 Chemical Engineering
Course 11 Urban Studies and Planning
Course 12 Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary
Sciences
Course 13 Ocean Engineering
Course 14 Economics
Course 15 Management
Course 16 Aeronautics and Astronautics
Course 17 Political Science
Course 18 Mathematics
Course 20 Program in Applied Biological
Sciences
Course 21 Humanities
21A Anthropology
21F Foreign Languages and Literatures
21H History
21L Literature
21M Music and Theater Arts
21W Program in Writing and
Humanistic Studies
Course 22 Nuclear Engineering
Course 24 Linguistics and Philosophy

Course 2
Course 3
Course 4
Course 5
Course 6

Harvard-MIT Division of

Health Sciences and Technology
Program in Media Arts and Sciences
SP Special Programs

Science, Technology, and Society
Engineering School-Wide Electives
TOX Division of Toxicology

TPP Technology and Policy

ROTC

AS = Aerospace Studies
MS _ Military Science
NS Naval Science

School of Architecture and Planning

Architecture Course 4
Urban Studies and Planning Course 11
Program in Media Arts and Sciences MAS

School of Engineering

Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16
Chemical Engineering Course 10

Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1
Electrical Engineering and Computer

Science Course 6

Materials Science and Engineering Course 3
Mechanical Engineering Course 2

Nuclear Engineering Course 22

Ocean Engineering Course 13

Engineering School-Wide Electives SWE
Technology and Policy TPP

School of Humanities and Social
Science

Economics Course 14

Humanities Course 21

Anthi 21A

Foreign Languages and Literatures 21F
History 21H

Literature 21L

Music and Theater Arts 21M

Program in Writing and

Humanistic Studies 21W

Linguistics and Philosophy Course 24
Political Science Course 17

Program in Science, Technology, and
Society STS

Sloan School of Management
Management Course 15

School of Science

Biology Course 7

Brain and Cognitive Sciences Course 9
Chemistry Course 5

Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary
Sciences Course 12

Mathematics Course 18

Physics Course 8

Program in Applied Biological

Sciences Course 20

Whitaker College of Health Sciences
and Technology

Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences
and Technology HST

Division of Toxicology TOX

Other Programs
Special Programs SP

ROTC

Aerospace Studies AS
Military Science MS
Naval Science NS

298 Chapter VIII


--- 01.pdf Page 3 ---
Explanatory Notes

Guide to Subject Listings

The descriptions in this chapter are subject to
change. The final list of subjects to be offered
in 1996-97 is published with the class
schedules booklet prior to the beginning of
each term.

On the World Wide Web, see
http://registrar.mit.edu/ for an integrated,
searchable subject listing/schedule.

The following are examples of undergraduate
and graduate subject listings. Each subject list-
ing consists of three parts: the subject name,
subject information, and subject description.

Subject Name

The subject name consists of its number and
title, and appears above the first horizontal line.

5.77J Topics in Metabolic Biochemistry
(New) &

(Same subject as 7.75J)
Prereq.: 7.05 or 5.07

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Special topics include major metabolic path-

ways for the biosynthesis of certain cellular
constituents and oxidative metabolism. Em-
phasis is on enzymology and methods used to
understand metabolism and enzymatic proces-
ses.

G. M. Brown, J. Stubbe

J at the end of a subject number indicates that
this subject is offered jointly by more than one
department. The subject numbers of the other
departments are indicated in the Subject Infor-
mation section following the phrase Same
subject as.

(New) below the subject number and title indi-
cates a subject offering that is new to the
catalogue. (Revised Units) or (Revised Con-
tent) below the subject number and title indi-
cates a change from the previous catalogue.

Subject Information

Information about the subject appears below
the first horizontal line.

18.014 Calculus with Theory

(18.012)

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

5-0-7 CALC!

Credit cannot also be received for 18.01 or
18.011

Covers the same material as 18.01, but ata
deeper and more rigorous level. Emphasizes
careful reasoning and understanding of proofs.
Assumes knowledge of elementary calculus.
Topics: axioms for the real numbers; the
Riemann integral; limits, theorems on con-
tinuous functions; derivatives of functions of
one variable; the fundamental theorems of cal-
culus; Taylor's theorem; infinite series, power
series, rigorous treatment of the elementary
functions.

J. R. Munkres

The former number of a renumbered subject
is indicated in parentheses below the first
horizontal line.

Same subject as appears in parentheses fol-
lowed by the subject's other number(s) if the
subject is joint or SWE. Meets with appears if
the subject is taught together with one or more
different-level subjects, or if part of the subject
is taught in conjunction with another subject.

Prerequisite subjects, if any, are listed, or the
prerequisite is described. Numbers in italics in-
dicate corequisites — prerequisite subjects
that may be taken simultaneously with the sub-
ject described. If there are no prerequisites or
corequisites, a dash (—) appears. Pre-
requisites may be waived by the instructor in
charge for particularly well-qualified students.

Year offered may state Acad Year 1996-97:
Not offered or Acad Year 1997-98: Not of-
fered. There is no comment if the subject is of-
fered in both academic years 1996-97 and
1997-98.

Subject level and term follow. U is an under-
graduate subject, and G is a subject primarily
for graduate students. IAP is MIT’s Inde-
pendent Activities Period.

Credit units, which indicate a subject's time
distribution, are represented by three numbers
separated by dashes. The number of units as-
signed for recitation and lecture is first; for
laboratory, design, or fieldwork second; and
for preparation, third. Add all of the units
together to obtain the total credit for a subject.

¢

One unit represents approximately 14 hours of
work, Units arranged indicates that units are
specially arranged by the instructor.

Subjects fulfilling the General Institute Require-
ments, such as BIOLOGY, PHYSICS, CALC,
CHEMISTRY, REST (Restricted Electives in
Science and Technology, formerly SCI DIST),
Institute LAB, or HASS-D (Humanities, Arts,
and Social Sciences Distribution) are so desig-
nated to the right of the credit units.

HASS indicates subjects that can be used to
satisfy the Humanities, Arts, and Social Scien-
ces Requirement (other than HASS-D sub-
jects).

HASS-D Language Option indicates lan-
guage subjects which may be substituted for
one HASS-D subject.

[P/D/F] appears to the right of the credit units
if the subject is graded on a P, D, or F basis
(where P means C or better performance).

H-LEVEL Grad Credit indicates an approved
subject for higher graduate-level degree credit.
In some cases, a message follows the designa-
tion indicating that the subject is H-level in cer-
tain departments.

Can be repeated for credit appears under
the credit units if the subject can be taken
more than once for academic credit.

Subject Description

The subject description appears below the
second horizontal line.

21F.101 Chinese

(21.245)
Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS

Introduction to spoken and written modern <@Js
Chinese (Mandarin). Pronunciation, sentence
structure, grammar, conversation, reading and
writing. Lab work required. Enrollment limited
to 20 students.

Y. Tai

Any subject open only to special groups is so
noted at the end of its description. If the sub-

ject description does not appear, the number

of the subject under which the description ap-
pears is given.

The name of the instructor(s) in charge as
known at the time of publication is listed in
italics, or the name of the departmental con-
tact is listed in regular type.

Descriptions of Subjects 299


--- 01.pdf Page 4 ---
School of Engineering

Course 1

Fundamentals

1.00 Introduction to Computers and
Engineering Problem Solving

(Subject meets with 1.001)
Prereq.: 18.01

U (Fall, Spring)

3-1-8 REST

Fundamental computational algorithms for en-
gineering and scientific applications. Weekly
programming problems cover numerical
analysis, graphics, data structures, searching,
sorting, matrix methods, and simulation. Em-
phasis on developing techniques for solving
computational problems in engineering,
science, management, and planning. Subject
taught using the C++ programming language
in the Fall term and the C programming lan-
guage in the Spring term. Some programming
background helpful, particularly for the Fall
term.

Fall Term: S. R. Lerman

Spring Term: E. A. Kausel

1.001 Introduction to Computers and
Engineering Problem Solving
(New)

(Subject meets with 1.00)

Prereq.: 18.01

G (Fall, Spring)

3-1-5

Meets with undergraduate subject 1.00. See
description under 1.00.

Fall Term: S. A. Lerman

Spring Term: E. A. Kausel

1.03 Introduction to Probability and
Statistics for Engineers

Prereq.: 18.01, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-2-7

Elements of probability and statistics with em-
phasis on engineering applications. Probability
topics include univariate and multivariate dis-
tributions, estimation, and prediction; engineer-
ing reliability analysis; and Poisson and
Markov processes. Statistics include classical
and Bayesian methods of parameter estima-
tion and hypothesis testing.

D. Veneziano

300 Chapter Vill

Civil and Environmental
Engineering

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter Vil under the School of
Engineering.

1.04 Solid Mechanics

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.01

U (Spring)

3-2-7 REST

Static equilibrium. Forces in trusses. Stress,
strain, and Hooke’s law; introduction to stress-
strain behavior of construction materials. Tor-
sion in members of circular cross-section.
Stresses and deflections in beams. Stresses
on inclined planes and the use of Mohr’s circle
for plane stress. Design project using
Growltiger software package.

L. J. Gibson

1.05 Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03

U (Spring)

3-2-7

Introduction to the mechanics of incompres-
sible fluid flow. Fluid properties. Hydrostatics.
Conservation of mass and momentum using
differential and integral balances. The Bernoul-
li equation. Shear stresses and velocity
profiles in laminar and turbulent flows.
Dynamic similarity. First law of ther-
modynamics and the energy equation. Applica-
tions to steady flow in conduits and open
channels, pumps, turbines, drag and lift on im-
mersed objects.

O. S. Madsen

1.10J Environment and Technology

(Subject meets with 10.470J, 10.570J,
TPP.52J)

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-6

Introduction to environmental problems arising
from commonplace technologies (e.g., plas-
tics, electronics, automobiles). Considers the
sustainability of resource use and the introduc-
tion of chemicals into the environment. II-
lustrates how to predict the fates of those
chemicals in air-water-land-biota systems. Con-
siders environmental and health consequen-
ces of products and the processes used for
their manufacture. Discusses how we might
respond to undesirable impacts, including
product redesign and development of policies
to achieve environmentally sensitive improve-
ments. Meets with graduate subject 10.570J,
but assignments differ.

P. Gschwend, J. Ehrenfeld, A. Sarofim

For additional undergraduate introductory
subjects, see 1.30, 1.40, 1.50, 1.60, 1.70,
1.80.

Undergraduate Laboratory
Subjects

1.102 Transportation Laboratory

Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

0-3-3 Institute LAB

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory experience with the properties of
transportation systems. Students formulate an
experiment based upon readings and discus-
sions of current transportation problems. Em-
phasis on formulation of hypotheses about
properties and effects of different types of
transportation systems; planning of experi-
ments and data collection in the field to test
these hypotheses, analysis of results, and
development of recommendations for changes
in transport systems plans and policies.
Consult N. H. M. Wilson.

1.105 Structural Engineering Laboratory

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
0-3-3 Institute LAB

Introduces students to properties of structural
materials and behavior of simple structural ele-
ments and systems through a series of experi-
ments. Several laboratory projects involve the
student as both the designer and fabricator of
a structure.

C. Leung

1.106 Fluid Mechanics Laboratory

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

0-2-4 Institute LAB

Credit cannot also be received for 1.108

The measurement and analysis of physical
parameters such as velocity, pressure, salinity,
temperature, dissolved solids, etc., in closed
conduits and natural water bodies. Application
of these techniques in the context of six
laboratory experiments. Certain experiments
complement lectures in 1.05, but concurrent
registration in 1.05 or previous fluid mechanics
experience is not required. (Six additional
units, satisfying the Institute Lab Requirement,
may be obtained by registering for 1.108
rather than 1.106.)

E. E. Adams, H. M. Nepf


--- 01.pdf Page 5 ---
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

1.107 Aquatic Chemistry Laboratory

Prereq.: 5.11
U (Spring)
2-6-4 Institute LAB

Field sampling and analysis tech-
niques for determining chemical (6.g., salinity,
metals, O2, nutrients, haloforms, petroleum
hydrocarbons) — Sete (e.9., — I,
hytoplankton g) tates) parameters in
Pauatio samples. Both wet-chemical and in-
strumental (@.g., atomic absorption
spectrometry and gas chromatography)
methods. Field trips are taken to acquire “real
world” samples for analysis and interpretation
of the data in terms of water quality and the
processes affecting it. An independently
designed final project is required. Enrollment
limited to 16 per section.
H. F. Hemond, S. Frankel

1.108 Environmental Fluid Mechanics
Laboratory

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

0-4-8 Institute LAB

Credit cannot also be received for 1.106

Extends the subject material of 1.106 by includ-
ing additional laboratory experiments and one
or more field experiments in topics of current
interest in environmental fluid mechanics. Also
includes end-of-term group design project.

E. E. Adams, H. M. Nepf

Engineering Information Systems
and Computation

1.12 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00

U (Spring)

3-1-8

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

F. Pefia-Mora

1.120 Information Technology M.Eng.
Project
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 1.124J or knowledge of C++; limited

to Course 1 M.Eng. students
G (Fall, IAP)
2-2-5 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Core requirement for Information Technology

M.Eng. program. Introduction to software
design methodology focusing on the strategic
and the analysis phases, which lead into the
design phase. Students develop the feature
set and functional specifications for a software
product. Involves assessment of leading-edge
products related to networks, CAE, GUls, and
groupware. Example projects might be a Web
browser for engineering information (3D CAD
etc.) or an information filter agent for net-
worked databases. This is the Information
Technology M.Eng. program project subject.
Students must also register for 1.125 during
the spring term.

J. R. Williams

1.124J Computer Aided Engineering |

(Same subject as 2.159J, 13.4704)
Prereq.: 1.00 and knowledge of C
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Foundations subject in modern software

development techniques for numerical algo-
rithms; the use of data structures and as-
sociated algorithms related to numerical
analysis, geometric modeling, and visualiza-
tion; basic problem-solving techniques using
computational methods. Object-oriented
software design (using C++); data structures
sorting and searching algorithms; string
processing, geometric, and graph algorithms;
numerical and hierarchical analysis techni-
ques; visualization techniques. Foundation for
more in-depth exploration of computational
geometry, geometric modeling, finite element
methods, and network methods. Core require-
ment for Information Technology M.Eng. pro-

gram.
J. R. Williams
1.125 Computer Aided Engineering Il:

Software Design and Development

Prereq.: 1.124J or Knowledge of C++
G (Spring)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Software design and development is con-

cerned with long-term, large-scale program-
ming projects. Subject introduces software
design techniques through the development of
a typical CAE package. Lectures cover object-
oriented software design techniques including
OMT, Rational Rose, Patterns, etc. and
domain-specific concepts needed to imple-
ment the CAE package. Core requirement for
Information Technology M.Eng. Program.

J. R. Williams

1.126J Pattern Recognition and Analysis

(Same subject as MAS.622J)

Prereq.: A working knowledge of probability
theory and linear algebra

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject MAS.622J.
R. W. Picard, A. Bobick

1.127J Design and Implementation of
Computer-Aided Engineering Systems

(Same subject as 2.157J, 13.471J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.157J.
D. C. Gossard, N. M. Patrikalakis

1.128J Computational Geometry

(Same subject as 13.472J, 2.158J)
Prereq.: 13.471J4/1.127J/2.157J or 6,837
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.472J.
N. M. Patrikalakis, D. C. Gossard

1.129 Information Content of the
Design-Development Process

Prereq.: 1.12 and 1.432 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the identification, representation,
and use of information developed, and ex-
plores the assumptions, concepts, and proce-
dures which influence decision making during
the design-development process. Examines
how new information influences the generation
of changes during the design-development
process and how that information can be used
for managing the changes. Considers the com-
plexity of distributed decision making accord-
ing to professional expertise, time difference,
and geographical areas. Group projects em-
phasize the use of case studies and the
development of information management sys-
tems. Mixed groups formed with information
technology, engineering, and management stu-
dents.

F. Pefia-Mora

See also 1.204, 1.571, 1.70.

Descriptions of Subjects 301


--- 01.pdf Page 6 ---
School of Engineering

Engineering Analysis Methods

1.131 Mathematical Techniques and
Engineering Applications

Prereq.: 18.03
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A utilitarian survey of elementary and inter-

mediate analytical techniques, and their ap-
plications in physical systems important to
engineering. Linear partial differential equa-
tions. Separation of variables. Green’s func-
tions. Fourier transforms. Bessel functions.
Applications to seepage, traffic flows, statics
and vibration of elastic structures, soil con-
solidation, and diffusion of heat or pollutants.
Additional topics may include complex func-
tions or perturbation techniques. Formulation
of physical problems and analysis of mathe-
matical solutions are emphasized.

C. C. Mei

1.133 M.Eng. Concepts of Engineering
Practice
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Limited to Course 1 M.Eng.students

G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

This core requirement for the M.Eng. program

is designed to teach students about the roles
of today's professional engineer and expose
them to team-building skills through lectures,
team workshops and seminars. Topics include
regulations, negotiations, risk analysis and risk
management, information systems, ethics,
managing public information, project evalua-
tion, and project management. Draws on a
relevant large-scale project to illustrate each
component of the subject. Grading is based on
both individual and team exercises along with
oral and written presentations.

D. H. Marks

See also 1.351, 1.541, 1.56J, 1.571, 1.63,
1.691.

302 Chapter Vill

Engineering Systems,
Economics, and Management

1.141J Strategic Analysis for
Environmental Policy Planning, Design,
and Implementation

(Same subject as 3.563J, 6.688J, 11.385J,

22.822), TPP.121J)

Prereq.: 1.146 or 2.192 or 3.56 or 13.62 or
16.861 or TPP.21 or 11.200 or 11.205

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Gives participants practical understanding of

the procedures for successfully designing com-
plex technical systems that must perform well
in a social context. Student teams work with
computer-based models to examine the effect
of alternative strategies; then define the
tradeoffs between energy use, environmental
quality, and costs, so as to develop a policy
which is consistent with the social, economic,
political and historical context of the region.
The example treated is the proposed policy of
requiring the introduction of personal electric
cars in the Los Angeles region, as a means of
reducing pollution.

D. H. Marks, R. de Neutville, J. Clark,

R. Gakenheimer, M. W. Golay, D. Sadoway,
R. D. Tabors

1.142 Civil Engineering Clinic

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Spring)
1-10-1

Designed to expose students to real-world civil

engineering projects and potential employment
opportunities. A list of clinic subjects — encom-
passing structural, geotechnical, transporta-
tion, and construction engineering — has been
developed in consultation with private and
public “sponsors” (local consulting and con-
tracting firms, government agencies, etc.). Stu-
dents select a project and work jointly with an
individual from the sponsoring firms and an
MIT faculty member. Requires comprehensive
written report and oral presentation.

L. J. Gibson

1.146 Engineering Systems Analysis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
R. de Neutville, J. P. Clark, F. Field

1.147 Design for Product Realization

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concerned with the process by which a con-
cept for a product is formulated and trans-
formed into an actual artifact. Focuses on the
design and manufacture of large-scale com-
plex engineered projects. Methodologies and
tools of system engineering are introduced to
develop models of the product and process,
and analyze the relationships between critical
design and production features. Topics include
interaction matrices, program planning, sys-
tems modeling and analysis, control algo-
rithms, axiomatic design principles, concurrent
engineering processes, and computational
design infrastructure. Core requirement for In-
formation Technology M.Eng. program.

J. J. Connor, Jr.

1.148J Economics of Project Evaluation

(Same subject as 14.111J)
Prereq.: 14.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 14.1114.
Consult P. Joskow.

See also 1.202, 1.203J, 1.207, 1.281, 1.283,
1.70, 1.731. For management of engineer-
ing systems, see also 1.40—1.482.

Engineering Risk Assessment
and Probabilistic Analysis

1.151 Probability and Statistics in
Engineering

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantitative analysis of uncertainty in plan-
ning, design, construction, and operation of en-
gineered facilities. Fundamentals of
probability, random processes, statistics, and
decision analysis. Random variables and vec-
tors and their transformations, second-moment
analysis. Bayesian analysis and risk-based
decision. Point and interval estimation,
hypothesis testing, simple and multiple linear
regression. Poisson and Markov processes.

D. Veneziano

1.155 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni

See also 1.203J, 1.711, 1.732.


--- 01.pdf Page 7 ---
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

Transportation

1.200 Methods for Transportation Systems
Analysis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-1-8

Provides the methodological foundation neces-
sary for the analytical study of the components
of transportation systems and the relationships
between them. Focuses on the use of linear
equation systems, optimization techniques,
and stochastic and statistical models.

Develops the mathematical prerequisites for
many advanced subjects in transportation.

C. Bamhart

1.201 Transportation Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the fundamental elements and is-
sues shaping passenger and resin transporta-
tion systems. Discusses the role of

transportation systems in society and
measures of system effectiveness on many
dimensions, including economic, environmen-
tal, and political. Covers deterministic and
stochastic models of system performance and
the determinants of transportation travel
demand. Analyzes transportation networks, in-
cluding prediction of costs and service quality.
Considers the design of transportation ser-
vices and facilities for various modes and inter-
modal operations. Case studies are used to
show the application of methods to different
types of transportation systems. Institutional
and policy issues are addressed.

J. Sussman

1.202 Demand Modeling

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis and forecasting of demand for
facilities and services. Emphasis on collection
and analysis of survey data. Review elements
of probability, sampling, and statistical
methods. Includes alternative sample designs
and data collection methods, matrix-entry es-
timation methods, linear regression analysis,
discrete choice methods, estimation and test-
ing of disaggregate and aggregate models, ag-
gregate forecasting methods and simulation.
Illustrated with applications from the fields of
transportation, housing, telecommunications,
and marketing.

M. E. Ben-Akiva

1.203J Logistical and Transportation
Planning Methods

(Same subject as 6.281J, 11.526J, 13.665J,

15.073, 16.76¥)

Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantitative techniques of operations research
with emphasis on applications in transportation
systems analysis (urban, air, ocean, highway,
pickup and delivery systems) and in the plan-
ning and design of logistically oriented urban
service systems (e.g., fire and police depart-
ments, emergency medical services, emergen-
cy repair services). Unified study of functions
of random variables, geometrical probability,
multi-server queuing theory, spatial location
theory, network analysis and graph theory,
and relevant methods of simulation. Computer
exercises, discussion of implementation difficul-
ties.

A. |. Barnett, R. C. Larson, A. R. Odoni

1.204 Computer Algorithms in
Transportation

Prereq.: 1.00 or 1.001 or permission of instruc-

tor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Teaches techniques and tools for design,

analysis, and implementation of efficient algo-
rithms. An integrated view of algorithms, data
structures, and computer architecture is em-
phasized. Algorithmic techniques studied in-
clude: greedy algorithms, divide-and-conquer,
dynamic programming, probabilistic algo-
rithms, network optimization based algorithms
and graph traversal techniques. Advanced
topics include: high-performance computing
and real-time optimization.

|. Chabini

1.205 Advanced Demand Modeling

Prereq.: 1.202 or 14.388
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theories and applications of behavior models.

Includes: linear and nonlinear latent variable
models, multidimensional probabilistic choice
models, survey design, statistical estimation
techniques with multiple data sources, model
transferability, estimation and forecasting with
very large choice sets, joint discrete and con-
tinuous models, dynamical models. Issues in
model specification, including use of stated
preference data, and analysis of complex
choices. Term paper required.

M. E. Ben-Akiva

1.206 Optimization of Transportation
Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores a variety of optimization techniques
for the solution of large-scale transportation
problems. Models and solution methods, in-
cluding decomposition and relaxation, are
presented for a variety of problems faced by
carriers and/or shippers. Students are required
to complete a research project and to present
their findings. Alternate years.

C. Barnhart

1.207 Models and Algorithms for
Transportation Networks
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 1.200 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Formulation, analysis, and solution of network
problems. Topics include: network equilibrium
analysis; static system optimum traffic assign-
ment; time-dependent approaches for dynamic
systems; stochastic systems; simulation ap-
proaches; network control; implementation of
various solution methods to solve large-scale
applications.

1. Chabini

1.208J Transportation and Logistics
Analysis

(Same subject as 15.770J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to inventory theory. Analysis of
tradeoffs between transportation and inventory
cost. Routing and scheduling with inventory
considerations. Distribution network design

and carrier network design. Optimization of car-
rier networks with emphasis on truck and rail
networks. Integration of carrier and shipper
perspective in system models. International
logistics issues.

Y. Sheffi

1.209J Case Studies in Logistics and
Supply Chain Management

(Same subject as 15.771J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6

A combination of lectures and cases covering
the strategic, management, and operating is-
sues in contemporary logistics and integrated
supply chain management. Includes: logistics
strategy; supply chain restructuring and
change management; and distribution, cus-
tomer service, and inventory policy.

Y. Sheffi

Descriptions of Subjects 303


--- 01.pdf Page 8 ---
School of Engineering

1.212 An Introduction to Intelligent
Transportation Systems

Prereq.: Permission of Instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic elements of intelligent transportation sys-

tems. Technological, systems, and institutional
aspects of ITS considered, including system ar-
chitecture, congestion pricing, public/private
partnerships, network models, ITS as industrial
policy, implementation case studies. Term
project required. Alternate years.

J. Sussman

1.231J Planning and Design of Airport
Systems

(Same subject as 16.781J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Equal emphasis on current practice and ad-

vanced concepts. Airport location and planning
with full consideration of economic, environ-
mental, and other impacts. Demand prediction,
determination of the capacity of the airfield, es-
timation of levels of congestion. Design of ter-
minals. Role of airports in the aviation and
transportation system. Airport access
problems. Optimal configuration of air
transport networks and implications for airport
development. Economics of the airport. Financ-
ing and institutional aspects. Special attention
to international practice and developments. Al-
ternate years.

R. de Neutville, A. R. Odoni

1.233J Seminar in Air Transportation
Analysis and Planning

(Same subject as 16.73J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

1-0-5

See description under subject 16.73J.
A. R. Odoni, P. P. Belobaba

1.25J Technology, Policy, and
Sustainability in the Middle East

(Same subject as 17.559J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

May not count toward HASS Requirement.

See description under subject 17.559J.
N. Choucri, F. Moavenzadeh

1.251J Transportation and Government —
Public Policy and Politics

(Same subject as 11.379J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)
3-0-6

The reasons for government involvement in

building transportation infrastructure, the or-
ganization and regulation of transportation ser-
vices, and the safety and economic regulation
of vehicles and the energy systems which fuel
them. Reviews the historical, public policy, and
political reasons for government involvement
in transportation, and analyzes the current in-
stitutional mechanisms of government in air,
water, rail, highway, auto, trucking, and transit
systems. Issues include privatization, deregula-
tion, federal program development, and inter-
governmental conflicts.

F. Salvucci, R. Gakenheimer

1.252J Urban Transportation Planning

(Same subject as 11.380J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.380J.
R. A. Gakenheimer, F. Salvucci, T. Humphrey

1.254J Infrastructure in Developing
Countries

(Subject meets with 11.469J, 11.104)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.469J.
R. A. Gakenheimer

1.255J Political Economy and Technology
in the Middle East

(Same subject as 17.558J, 21H.977J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 17.558J.
N. Choucri, F. Moavenzadeh, P. S. Khoury, R.
Gakenheimer

1.256J Technology, Policy, and
Sustainability in the Middle East

(Same subject as 17.560J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 17.560J.
N. Choucri, F. Moavenzadeh, R. Gakenheimer

1.258J Public Transportation Service and
Operations Planning

(Same subject as 11.381J)

Prereq.: 1.201 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Evolution and role of urban public transporta-
tion modes, systems, and services, including
bus and rail. Description of technological char-
acteristics and their impacts on capacity, ser-
vice quality, and cost. Current practice and
new methods for performance monitoring,
route design, vehicle and crew scheduling.
Effect of pricing policy and service quality on
ridership. Methods for estimating costs as-
sociated with proposed service changes.

N. H. M. Wilson

1.259J Transit Management

(Same subject as 11.382J)

Prereq.: 1.258J or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Management methods of relevance to public
transportation systems. Topics: strategic plan-
ning management; labor relations; main-
tenance planning and administration; financial
planning; marketing; and management informa-
tion and decision support systems. Shows how
these general management tasks are dealt
with in the transit industry and presents alterna-
tive strategies. Identifies alternative arrange-
ments for service provision, including different
ways of involving the private sector in public
transportation.

N. H. M. Wilson, F. Salvucci

1.27 Studies in Transportation
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual advanced study of a topic in
transportation systems, selected with the ap-
proval of the instructor.

Information: N. H. M. Wilson.

1.271 Research Seminar in Transportation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Discussion of current research at various
stages of development, including problem
definition, literature review, methodology, and
evaluation of results. Intended for advanced
doctoral students who have passed the
general examination.

N. H. M. Wilson

304 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 9 ---
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

4.281 Transportation Economics

Prereq.: 14.01

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the economic analysis of
transportation markets: urban and intercity,
passenger and freight, national and internation-
al. Utility theory and its application to transport
demand. Production theory and the analysis of
transport costs. Market structures and
transport pricing. Externalities. Public goods.
The role of government in regulating transport
and providing infrastructure.

Information: N. H. M. Wilson.

1.283J The Economics of Cities and
Regions

(Same subject as 14.573J, 11.410J)
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 14.573J.
W. Wheaton

1.284J Regional Economic Theories,
Accounts, and Techniques

(Same subject as 11.481J)
Prereq.: 14.03, 14.04

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.481J.
K. R. Polenske

1.285J Regional Socioeconomic Impact
Analyses and Modeling

(Same subject as 11.482J)

Prereq.: 11.481J or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.482J.
K. R. Polenske

1.286 Freight Transportation
Management

Prereq.: 1.201, 1.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Methods for analysis of freight systems, with
emphasis on rail and motor carrier operations
and management of carrier assets. Study of
competitive transportation companies and the
environment in which they operate. Market is-
sues, organizational structure, information sys-
tems, and decisionmaking processes for fleet
management, facility operations, maintenance,
and operations/service planning. Case studies
illustrate effects of regulation, technology,
labor relations, and competition on carrier
Strategies. Alternate years.

C. D. Martland

Geoenvironmental and
Geotechnical Engineering

1.30 Introduction to Geotechnical
Engineering

Prereq.: 1.04
U (Fall)
3-2-7

Fundamentals of soil mechanics taught in con-

text of three to four design exercises. Phase
relationships; geostatic stresses; friction
angles; Rankine and Coulomb earth pres-
sures; effective stress; Darcy's law; heads;
seepage force; flow nets; compression and
swell of clays; consolidation and settlement;
drained and undrained strength of simple clay;
effective and total stress paths. Design exer-
cises such as retaining walls with and without
seepage, controlling settlements, and safe con-
struction of embankments.

P. J. Culligan-Hensley

1.32 Introduction to Engineering Geology

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-3-6 REST

Basic principles of physical geology, emphasiz-

ing topics pertinent to environmental and civil
engineering. Identification of minerals; ig-
neous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks.
Alluvial, glacial, eolian, lacustrine, marine, and
colluvial sediments. Weathering. Faults and
fractures. Air photos and geologic maps. Field
trips. Term paper; can be used for Phase 2 of
the Writing Requirement.

H. H. Einstein

1.322 Soil Behavior

Prereq.: 1.361

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Detailed study of soil properties with emphasis

on interpretation of field and laboratory test
data and their use in soft-ground construction
engineering. Includes: consolidation and
secondary compression; basic strength prin-
ciples; stress-strain strength behavior of clays,
emphasizing effects of sample disturbance,
anisotropy and strain rate; strength and com-
pression of granular soils; engineering proper-
ties of compacted soils. Some knowledge of
field and laboratory testing assumed; 1.37
desirable. Alternate years.

C. C. Ladd

1.331 Soil Dynamics
Prereq.: 1.361

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Stress-strain behavior during transient and

repeated loadings, relation to wave velocity.
Strength degradation and liquefaction.
Analysis of foundations subjected to dynamic
loadings; effect of soils upon seismic motions;
earth dams and retaining walls during
earthquakes; other selected applications. Alter-
nate years.

Staff

1.34 Waste Containment and Remediation
Technology

Prereq.: 1.30, permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the geotechnical aspects of haz-
ardous waste management, with specific em-
phasis on the design of land-based waste
containment structures and hazardous waste
remediation. Introduction to hazardous waste;
definition of hazardous waste, regulatory re-
quirements, waste characteristics,
geochemistry, and contaminant transport. The
design and operation of waste containment
structures; landfills, impoundments, and mine-
waste disposal. The characterization and
remediation of contaminated sites; the super-
fund law, preliminary site assessment, site in-
vestigation techniques, and remediation
technologies. Monitoring requirements.

P. J. Culligan-Hensley

1.351 Theoretical Soil Mechanics

Prereq.: 1.361

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presentation of fundamental theories in soil
mechanics: field equations of linear elasticity,
solutions of boundary value problems. Intro-
duction to finite element method. Steady and
transient flow in porous media; applications in
confined and unconfined seepage, one dimen-
sional consolidation. Introduction to poro-elas-
ticity. Yielding and failure of soils, plasticity
theory and limit analyses; with examples for
bearing capacity and slope stability. Cam Clay
models and critical state theory of soil behavior.
A. J. Whittle

1.361 Advanced Soil Mechanics

Prereq.: 1.30
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Consideration of the following fundamentals of
soil mechanics: the nature of soil; the effective
stress principle; permeability and seepage;
stress-strain-strength behavior of cohesionless
and cohesive soil; lateral earth stresses; bear-
ing capacity and slope stability; consolidation
theory; settlement analyses. Core requirement
for Geoenvironmental M.Eng. program.

C. C. Ladd

1.364 Advanced Geotechnical Engineering

Prereq.: 1.30, 1.361
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Site characterization and geotechnical aspects
of the design and construction of foundation
systems. Topics include site investigation (with
emphasis on in situ testing), shallow (footings
and raftings) and deep (piles and caissons)
foundations, excavation support systems,
groundwater control, slope stability, soil im-
provement (compaction, soil reinforcement,
etc.), and construction monitoring. Core re-
quirement for Geoenvironmental M.Eng. pro-
gram.

A. J. Whittle

Descriptions of Subjects 305


--- 01.pdf Page 10 ---
School of Engineering

1.366 Geotechnical Engineering
Prereq.: 1.30

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Identification, presentation, and illustration of

principles of soil mechanics. Considers the fol-
lowing topics: the nature of soil; the effective
stress principle; permeability and seepage;
Stress-strain-strength behavior of soil; lateral
earth stresses. Applies principles to stability
and deformation problems. Restricted to
graduate students not specializing in Geotech-
nical Engineering. Same lectures as for 1.361.
C. C. Ladd

1.37 Geotechnical Measurements and
Exploration

Prereq.: 1.30
G (Fall)
3-4-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application of testing principles to the measure-

ment of fundamental aspects of soil behavior
from classification to engineering properties.
Emphasis on rigorous techniques to measure
mechanical behavior under various boundary
conditions. Exposure to error estimation, re-
search devices, geotechnical field exploration,
and in situ testing. Experiments include data
analysis, evaluation, and presentation.

J. T. Germaine

1.38 Engineering Geology

Prereq.: 1.30, 1.32, or permission of instructor

G (Fall)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Effect of geologic features and processes on

constructed facilities; interaction between man-
made structures and human activities in
general, and the geologic environment. Plan-
ning of subsurface exploration. Engineering
geologic characterization of soil and rock, in-
cluding joint surveys and aspects of sedi-
mented and residual soils. Laboratory on basic
geologic identification and mapping techni-
ques. Extensive reading of case histories. Oc-
casional field trips.

H. H. Einstein

1.381 Rock Mechanics

Prereq.: 1.38, 1.361

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces theoretical and experimental

aspects of rock mechanics and on this basis
prepares the student for rock engineering. In-
cludes laboratory and field testing; empirical
and analytical methods for describing strength,
deformability, and permeability of intact rock
and rock masses; fracture mechanics and
mechanics of discontinua including flow
through discontinua; design and analysis of
rock slopes and foundations on rock; discus-
sion of blasting design. Alternate years.

H. H. Einstein

306 Chapter Vill

1.383 Underground Construction

Prereq.: 1.361, 1.38, or permission of
instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Familiarization with the most important aspects

of planning, design, and construction of under-
ground openings in soft ground and rock.
Detailed engineering analysis and design.
Major aspects of construction techniques and
construction planning. General planning and
economic problems. Major design project. Al-
ternate years.

H. H. Einstein

1.39 Studies in Geotechnical
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students desiring further in-

dividual study of special topics.
Information: C. C. Ladd.

Construction Engineering and
Management

1.40 Project Management
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9

Overview of construction industry, its organiza-

tions and interactions. Project and construction
management methodologies presented for
project and company planning, control, and
decision-making. Includes scheduling, estimat-
ing, resource planning, organization structuring
used throughout all phases of expected life of
facility.

E. S. Slaughter

1.42J Fundamentals of Energy in Buildings

(Same subject as 4.42J, 2.45J)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02

U (Fall)

3-0-9 REST

See description under subject 4.42J.
L. R. Glicksman

1.420 Innovation in Construction
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the current rate of innovation in the
construction industry. Constant technological
advances in materials, equipment, com-
ponents, and methods are changing the nature
of construction and the completed facilities. Ex-
plores these innovations and their effects on
the building process. Considers application of
general innovation theories to the construction
industry. Identifies probable sources of con-
struction innovation, such as suppliers,
manufacturers, builders, and occupants.
Regional differences in design requirements,
means and methods, usage patterns also in-
fluence innovation development and use.

E. S. Slaughter

1.431 Structuring Construction Industry
Organizations

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examination, from a socio-technical perspec-
tive, of the organizations and organizational
processes underlying the development, con-
struction, and operation of the buildings.
Studies the structure and functioning of firms,
sub-units of firms, and conglomerations of
firms with regard to the influence of a wide
range of factors including strategy, human and
other resources, and role in the project
development process. Frameworks for obser-
vation, description, analysis, and design of in-
dividual enterprises presented and applied to
real-world situations.

H. G. Irwig

1.432J Project Control
(Revised Content)

(Same subject as 13.615J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concepts, techniques, and information sys-
tems for planning, control, and management of
large-scale engineering projects. Performance
and control using estimating, scheduling, and
financial data. Network-based planning and
time control including CPM, PERT, and
resource constrained schedule. Integration of
cost and time control. Integration of project
control with strategic plan and information sys-
tems. Examines how new information can be
used for managing change. Considers the
complexity of distributed decision making
through workflow management. Covers the
use of various commercial software.

F. Pefia-Mora


--- 01.pdf Page 11 ---
1.44 Law and the Construction Industry

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Practical focus on key legal principles ap-
plicable to construction. Provides sufficient un-
derstanding to manage legal aspects, instead
of being managed by them. Contractual
relationships, contract performance, avoid-
ing/resolving disputes, designing procurement
systems, and legal aspects of contract
strategies. Case study applications. Topics in-
clude forms of organization, changes, differing
site conditions, designer liability, risk manage-
ment, public construction, surety bonds, liens,
E&O insurance, site safety, arbitration, ADR,
partnering. Invited industry speakers, in-class
arbitration.

J. B. Miller

1.441 Public Infrastructure Development
Systems
(New)

Prereq.: 1.44 or permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examination of new procurement and project
management strategies based on financeable
advances in technology from the private sec-
tor. Design of project delivery systems to cre-
ate and encourage viable projects, new
technology, private sector capital investment,
competition, and best value. Systematic
analysis for aligning technology, revenue, and
financing opportunities with public infrastruc-
ture funding and needs. Case study develop-
ment for air traffic control, waste water
treatment, automatic toll collection, and multi-
modal port development. Invited industry
speakers.

J. B. Miller

1.45 Construction Finance

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examination of financing methods and struc-
ture, project financial evaluation, and financial
management in the domestic and international
construction industry. Analytical concepts and
methodologies from modern finance theory
and practice presented in lecture/discussions
and applied to case analyses including
problems in cash flow analysis, corporate finan-
cial structure, project finance, and foreign ex-
change exposure. Innovative financial
securities, such as options, and methods such
as privatization and sale-leaseback are ex-
amined. Prior subjects in microeconomics, ac-
counting, and/or corporate finance desirable
but not required.

M. V. Samii

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

1.46 Strategic Management in the Design
and Construction Value Chain

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the fundamental concepts of
strategic planning and management in the con-
text of the engineering and construction in-
dustry. Discusses the basic business
relationships among firms in the design and
construction value chain. Specific topics in-
clude: industry analysis; strategic planning
models; human resource strategy; technology
strategy; strategy in fragmented industries;
and resource allocation. Case method of in-
struction is used, supplemented by extensive
readings.

J. Macomber

1.461 Corporate Organization For the Future

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Exploration of emerging trends which are

changing the nature of the engineering and
construction market and the implications of
these changes on corporate organization and
management in the engineering and construc-
tion industry. Case study of an actual cor-
porate reorganization is used to illustrate and
analyze: strategic management documents;
growth strategies; executive level manage-
ment roles and responsibilities; and critical
operational and financial control requirements.
R. W. Page

1.462 Marketing Client-Oriented Services

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Investigates the design, construction and

management needs of building sector clients
in the 1990s. The basic strategic marketing
program, its interrelationship with the
remainder of the organization, and its essential
role in the design and construction industry are
discussed. Subject includes guest lectures by
construction owners, designers, and contrac-
tors and a team project to develop business
and marketing plans for providing and im-
plementing services in various project stages.
J. F. Kennedy

1.471 Management of Large-Scale Systems

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-0-4

Provides an overview of current practices and

methods for managing the engineering,
procurement and construction of large-scale in-
frastructure project. Each year an engineering
firm, construction firm, government owner, or
private owner is invited to present a series of
lectures on actual case examples. For the past
several years, Boston’s Central Artery/Tunnel
Project has been the topic of the subject.
Information: C. H. Helliwell.

1.472 Innovative Contract Strategies in the
Public and Private Sectors

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the compatibility of various construc-
tion contracting methods, consisting of or-
ganizations, contracts, and award methods,
with certain types of projects and owners. Six
methods are examined: (1) traditional general
contracting; (2) construction management; (3)
multiple primes; (4) design-build; (5) turnkey;
and (6) build-operate-transfer. Subject in-
cludes lectures, case studies, guest speakers,
and a team project to analyze an actual case
example.

C. M. Gordon

1.481 Research Seminar in Construction
Engineering and Management

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

1-0-2 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar intended mainly for master’s and doc-
toral candidates in the Center for Construction
Research and Education. Oral and written
presentation by students on thesis activities
and by faculty on research topics.

C. H. Helliwell

1.482 Studies in Construction Engineering
and Management

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual study of an advanced topic in con-
struction engineering and management,
selected with approval of faculty supervisor.
F. Moavenzadeh

Materials and Structures

1.50 Structural Engineering

Prereq.: 1.04
U (Fall)
3-2-7

Introduces students to methods for the
analysis of statically determinate and indeter-
minate trusses, beams, and frames. Examples
are: method of sections; conjugate beam
method; moment distribution; etc. Determina-
tion of member forces and structural deforma-
tions (displacements); approximate methods;
structural stability; energy methods (virtual
force method); introduction to matrix methods.
E. Kausel

Descriptions of Subjects 307


--- 01.pdf Page 12 ---
School of Engineering

1.51 Design of Steel Structures
Prereq.: 1.50

U (Spring)

3-2-7

Objective is to develop a solid background in

the design principles of steel structures. Em-
phasis on contemporary design methods using
load and resistance factor design. Includes
design of structural members, joint, connec-
tions, and structural systems.

S. C. Wooh

1.52 Design of Concrete Structures

Prereq.: 1.50
U (Fall)
3-2-7

Objectives are to develop a solid background

in the design principles of concrete structures.
Emphasis on contemporary design methods
using ultimate load design concepts. Includes
design of reinforced concrete members for
bending, shear, and axial loads, and structural
systems.

O. Buyukozturk

1.53 Constructed Facilities Project
Laboratory

Prereq.: 1.59
U (Spring)
1-5-6 Institute LAB

Concepts, techniques, and devices used to

measure engineering properties of materials.
Emphasis placed on measurement of load-
deformation characteristics of common con-
struction materials, both natural and
fabricated. Half-semester project devoted to
experimental proof of hypothesis on some
aspect of testing or behavior. Emphasis placed
on approximation of testing errors.

J. T. Germaine

1.541 Behavior of Concrete Structures

Prereq.: 1.52
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Strength and deformation of concrete under

various states of stress; failure criteria. Fun-
damental behavior of reinforced concrete struc-
tures and their members. Basis for design, and
code constraints. High-performance concrete
materials and their use in innovative design
solutions. Slabs: yield line theory. Behavior
models and nonlinear analysis. Complex sys-
tems: bridge structures, concrete shells, and
containments.

O. Buyukozturk

1.542 Behavior of Steel Structures

Prereq.: 1.51
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Conceptual design of steel structural systems.

Wind and seismic effects. Design criteria for
members and systems. P-A effects. Structural
connections. Structural analysis versus struc-
tural design. Inelastic analysis procedures for
stability and limit states. Computer methods
for element and system design. Tall-building
design considerations.

Information: O. Buyukozturk.

1.543 Planning and Design of Structural
Systems

Prereq.: 1.50, 1.51

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concerned with the conceptualization and

preliminary design of structural systems.
Topics include: structural loadings; structural
components; horizontal-span building struc-
tures; gravity load systems; lateral load sys-
tems; tall buildings; shell roof systems;
lightweight structures; bridge systems.

J. J. Connor, Jr.

1.56J Structural Mechanics in Nuclear
Power Technology

(Same subject as 22.314J, 2.084J, 13.14J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.314J.
O. Buyukozturk, J. E. Meyer

1.571 Structural Analysis and Control

Prereq.: 1.51
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Computer-based methods for the analysis of

large-scale structural systems. Modeling
strategies for complex structures. Application
to tall buildings, cable-stayed bridges, and ten-
sion structures. Introduction to the theory of
structural control. Design and implementation
of control algorithms for structural systems sub-
jected to quasi-static loading.

J. J. Connor, Jr.

1.573J Introduction to Structural Mechanics

(Same subject as 13.10J)
Prereq.: 2.01 or 2.001, 18.03
G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.10J.
N. M. Patrikalakis, J. J. Connor, Jr.
1.581 Advanced Structural Dynamics

Prereq.: 1.50 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Comprehensive subject on the analysis of

structural systems for dynamic loads. General
formulation for discrete and continuous sys-
tems. Free vibrations and normal modes.
Forced vibrations induced by structural loads
or by ground motions. Viscous and hysteretic
damping. Solutions in the time domain: con-
volution, modal superposition, time-step in-
tegration. Solutions in the frequency domain
using the fast Fourier transform. Elements of
structural control theory, classical optimal con-
trol. Discrete time control. Application to build-
ings.

E. Kausel, J. J. Connor, Jr.

1.583 Nondestructive Evaluation of
Materials and Structures
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Overview of principles and applications of the
state-of-the-art NDE methods. Special em-
phasis on ultrasonics: fundamental wave mo-
tion in solids and fluids, transducers, imaging
and quantitative measurements, signal
processing, and basic instrumentation. Applica-
tions: flaw detection, materials charac-
terization, composite materials and structures.
S. C. Wooh

1.589 Studies in Structural Design and
Analysis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual study of advanced subjects under
staff supervision. Content arranged to suit the
particular requirements of the student and in-
terested members of the staff.

Information: O. Buyukozturk.

1.59 Mechanics of Construction Materials

Prereq.: 1.04
U (Spring)
3-0-6

Develops an understanding of the mechanical
behavior of construction materials. Includes
study of elastic, plastic, and time-dependent
behavior. Deterioration and failure
mechanisms, failure criteria. Applications in-
clude cementitious materials, steel, timber,
polymer, pavement materials, and composites.
Materials selection.

C. Leung

1.591J Fracture of Structural Materials

(Same subject as 3.90J, 13.16J)
Prereq.: 2.30 or 3.11 or 13.15

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 3.90J.
F. J. McGarry, K. Masubuchi

1.592 Mechanical Behavior of Construction
Materials

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops an understanding of material be-
havior based on microstructural mechanisms
of deformation and failure. Includes study of
elastic, plastic, creep, fracture, and durability
behavior. Applications to traditional construc-
tion materials (steel, concrete, and timber) as
well as recent developments in high-perfor-
mance civil engineering materials.

C. Leung

308 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 13 ---
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

1.593J Mechanical Behavior of Plastics

(Same subject as 3.91J)

Prereq.: 3.064

G (Spring)

3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 3.91J.
F. J. McGarry, D. K. Roylance

1.594J Composite Materials

(Same subject as 3.92J)
Prereq.: 3.064

G (Fall)

3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 3.92J.
F. J. McGarry

1.597 Studies in Construction Materials

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced topics in construction materials
selected by students for individual study with
staff approval.

Information: L. J. Gibson.

Hydrodynamics and Coastal
Engineering

1.60 Environmental Fluid Transport
Processes

(Subject meets with 1.61)

Prereq.: 1.05 or 2.20 or 10.301 or equivalent
U (Fall)

4-0-8

1.61 Environmental Fluid Transport
Processes

(Subject meets with 1.60)

Prereq.: 1.05 or 2.20 or 10.301 or equivalent
G (Fall)

4-0-8

Introduction to transport of momentum, mass,
and heat in water and air based on differential
form of conservation equations. Creeping,
laminar, and turbulent flows. Molecular and tur-
bulent diffusion, mixing and dispersion in the
fluid environment. Boundary layers and bound-
ary conditions. Transport of conservative and
non-conservative substances. Useful for stu-
dents with little or no fluids background inter-
ested in developing a greater physical intuition
for basic fluid movement and transport proces-
ses relevant to the environment. Graduate
level includes additional homework in the form
of reviews of relevant journal and practical ar-
ticles.

H. M. Nepf

1.63 Topics in Environmental Fluid
Dynamics

Prereq.: 1.60, 1.131 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theoretical topics of environmental fluid
dynamics over a wide variety of scales. Details
of low Reynolds flows around a sphere, and
implications on coagulation and Brownian dif-
fusion. Transient and oscillatory boundary
layers. Induced streaming and mass transport.
Dispersion in wave boundary layers. Applica-
tions of complex variables to potential flows
and seepage flows. Convection and instability
in flow through porous media. Effects of earth
rotation. Coriolis force and effects on waves.
Friction and wind. Ekman boundary layer,
Ekman pumping and quasi-geostripic flows.

1.64 Dynamics of Stratified Fluids

Prereq.: 1.60

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the dynamic effects of stratifica-
tion in natural fluid flows. Topics include: inter-
nal wave dynamics; double-diffusion; buoyant
jets and plumes; vertical mixing and turbulent
boundary layers in stratified fluids; instability
and turbulance in stratified shear flows.

H. M. Nepf

1.66 Problems in Water Resources and
Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced topics selected by students for in-
dividual study with staff approval. Choice of
subjects from theoretical, experimental, and
practical phases of hydromechanics, hydraulic
engineering, water resources, hydrology, and
environmental engineering.

Information: H. F. Hemond.

1.67 Sediment Transport and Coastal
Processes

Prereq.: 1.60, 1.69

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasizes the quantitative description of the
mechanics of sediment transport in steady and
unsteady flows based on hydrodynamic prin-
ciples. Equations of motion for particles in a tur-
bulent flow, entrainment, bedload, and
suspended load. Bedform mechanics, ripples,
dunes. Flow resistance and boundary-layer
mechanics. Wave-induced longshore currents,
longshore and on-offshore sediment transport.
Coastal protection. Basic theory of water
waves assumed known; contact instructor in
late August if this presents a problem.

O. S. Madsen

1.69 Introduction to Coastal
Engineering

Prereq.: 1.60
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic hydrodynamics of waves in deep and
shallow water. Linear theory, dispersion, super-
position, spectral representation. Energy, ener-
gy transport, dissipation by bottom friction.
Refraction, diffraction by breakwaters. Some
nonlinear aspects, wave breaking. Em-
phasizes physical interpretation of mathemati-
cal results and their engineering application.
Storm surges, coastal circulation, forecasting
of wind-wave characteristics. Wind-wave statis-
tics, wave forces on piles; breakwater stability.
O. S. Madsen

1.691 Surface Wave Dynamics

Prereq.: 1.131, 1.69, or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Dynamics of surface gravity waves in coastal
seas. Emphasizes mechanical principles and
theoretical methods of analysis. Ray theory of
refraction, wave interaction with longshore
bars, scattering of shallow-water waves,
linearized theory of harbor oscillation. Diffrac-
tion by large bodies. Transient aspects of dis-
persion and tsunamis. Radiation stresses and
short-wave/long-wave interactions. Nonlinear
modulation of short waves and instability.
Solitons and harmonic generation.

C. C. Mei

1.697J Oceanographic Systems |

(Same subject as 13.990J)
Prereq.: —

G (Summer)

2-4-6

See description under subject 13.990J.
(Woods Hole Staff), J. F. Lynch

1.698J Oceanographic Systems II

(Same subject as 13.991J)
Prereq.: —

G (Summer)

2-4-6

See description under subject 13.991J.
(Woods Hole Staff)

1.699 Special Projects in Oceanographic
Engineering

(Same subject as 13.999J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 13.999J.
(Woods Hole Staff)

Descriptions of Subjects 309


--- 01.pdf Page 14 ---
School of Engineering

Hydrology and Water Resource
Systems

1.70 Environmental Engineering Clinic

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Spring)

2-8-2

Can be repeated for credit

Designed to expose students to real-world en-

vironmental engineering projects and potential
employment opportunities. A list of clinic
projects — encompassing physical, chemical,
and biological aspects of environmental en-
gineering — has been developed in consult-
ation with private and public “sponsors” (local
consulting firms, state agencies, etc.). Stu-
dents select a project, and work jointly with an
individual from the sponsoring firm and an MIT
faculty member. Requires comprehensive writ-
ten report and oral presentation.

E. E. Adams

1.71J Introduction to Hydrology

(Same subject as 12.320J)
Prereq.: 1.03, 1.05, or equivalents
U (Fall)

3-0-9

The hydrologic cycle and relevant atmospheric

processes; water and energy balance; radia-
tion; precipitation formation; evaporation;
transpiration by vegetation; infiltration and
storm runoff processes. Groundwater flow and
the hydraulics of wells. Routing of runoff and
flood water. Probabilistic analysis and extreme-
value theory for determination of flood hazard.
Data analysis and design in water resource en-
gineering.

D. Entekhabi

1.711 Engineering Hydrology

Prereq.: 1.03, 1.05, 1.71J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Models of hydrologic processes for selected

engineering applications. Rainfall-runoff
models, flood routing, urban hydrology,
flood/drought frequency analysis, loss estima-
tion, groundwater models, and storage
analysis. Data sources for hydrologic models:
instrumentation, measurement systems,
remote sensing. Model limitations and the re-
search-practice gap.

Consult D. McLaughlin.

1.713J Land-Atmosphere Interaction

(Same subject as 12.826J)

Prereq.: 1.71J or 1.714 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Exchange of mass, heat, and momentum be-

tween the soil, vegetation, or water surface
and the overlying atmosphere; flux and
transport in the turbulent boundary layer;
coupled balance of moisture and energy.
Hydrothermal flux and storage in unsaturated
porous media. Evapotranspiration, infiltration,
and hillslope processes. Diagnostics of global
cycle of water and energy. Remote sensing
techniques and in situ observation techniques.
Introduction to numerical models of coupled at-
mospheric and hydrologic processes at local,
regional, and global scales.

D. Entekhabi

1.714 Surface Hydrology

Prereq.: 1.71J or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers observations and theory of the physical

processes involved in the hydrologic cycle.
Processes considered include atmospheric
radiation and transport, rainfall, infiltration,
runoff generation, stream flow, evaporation,
transpiration, rainfall interception, and snow
processes. Problem sets, a short term paper,
and a final examination.

E. A. B. Eltahir

1.715 Environmental Data Analysis

Prereq.: 1.03 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers probabilistic concepts and techniques

that are useful for environmental data analysis.
The topics include: random variables;
hypothesis testing; linear regression, analysis
of trends; space/time domain analysis; frequen-
cy domain analysis; simulation of random
fields; Markovian processes; derived distribu-
tions; and stochastic differential equations.
Problem sets emphasize environmental ap-
plications.

E. A. B. Eltahir

1.72 Groundwater Hydrology

Prereq.: 1.60
G (Fall)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces subsurface flow theory and applica-

tions; storage properties, Darcy equation, flow
nets, mass conservation, the aquifer flow equa-
tion, heterogeneity and anisotropy, regional
vertical circulation, unsaturated flow, and
recharge. Well hydraulics, stream-aquifer inter-
action, distributed- and lumped-parameter
numerical models. Groundwater quality, mixing
cell models, contaminant transport processes,
dispersion, decay and adsorption; pollution
sources. Includes laboratory and computer
demonstrations. Core requirement for Environ-
mental and Geoenvironmental M.Eng. pro-
gram.

L. W. Gelhar

1.721 Advanced Subsurface Hydrology

Prereq.: 1.72, 18.075, permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced treatment of flow in natural porous
media with applications to resource develop-
ment and environmental protection. Fluid
transport processes in deformable media,
boundary conditions, and problem formulation.
Stochastic treatment of temporal and spatial
variability. Contaminant transport, macrodisper-
sion, tracer tests, salt water intrusion, heat
transport, unsaturated flow and solute
transport, flow and transport in fractured rocks.
Large-scale behavior of heterogeneous media
and uncertainty in model predictions.

L. W. Gelhar

1.723 Groundwater Quality and Remediation
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 1.72

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles and applications of contaminant
transport and transformation processes relat-
ing to subsurface water as a natural resource;
sources of contamination, drinking water stand-
ards and risk, advection, dispersion, transfor-
mation, retardation and attenuation of solutes;
vadose zone transport, multiphase flows,
NAPL transport, colloidal transport, sorption,
volatilization, chemical equilibrium reactions,
and biodegradation; simulation of reactive
transport, field-scale processes and
heterogeneity, site characterization and dis-
posal risk assessment models. Alternate years.
L.W. Gelhar

1.724 Groundwater Modeling

Prereq.: 1.72, 18.03 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals and applications of numerical
modeling to groundwater systems.
Groundwater modling is presented as a
process in which numerical solutions of the
governing groundwater flow and contaminant
transport equations are developed as part of
an integrated approach that incorporates is-
sues such as data requirements, natural
heterogeneities, and interpretation of modeling
results. Discretization techniques, different
numerical methods and reactive contaminant
transport, calibration targets, sensitivity
analysis, and modeling limitations. Alternate
years.

D. McLaughlin

310 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 15 ---
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

1.7253 Chemicals in the Environment: Fate
and Transport

(Same subject as TPP.51J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-9

For Institute students in all departments inter-

ested in the behavior of chemicals in the en-
vironment (see TPP listings for other subjects).
Emphasis on man-made chemicals, their
movement through water, air, and soil, and
their eventual fate. Physical transport, as well
as chemical and biological sources and sinks,
are discussed. Linkages to health effects, sour-
ces and control, and policy aspects. Core re-
quirement for Environmental M.Eng. program.
H. F. Hemond

1.731 Water Resource Systems

Prereq.: 1.72, 1.714, 18.03 or equivalent

G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of deterministic optimization methods

for management of large-scale water projects.
Linear, integer, nonlinear, and dynamic
programming illustrated with case studies. Ap-
plications include reservoir and irrigation
development, conjunctive use of surface and
groundwater, and hazardous waste remedia-

tion.
D. McLaughlin

1.732 Hydrologic Estimation and Prediction

Prereq.: 1.715

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantitative methods for describing uncertain-

ty and natural variability. Estimating unobserv-
able physical parameters from field
measurements. Real-time forecasting and con-
trol. Environmental data assimilation. Case
studies include stream flow forecasting, reser-
voir operations, characterization of subsurface
contamination.

D. McLaughlin

Aquatic Sciences, Water Quality
Control, and Environmental
Management

1.75 Limnology and Wetland Ecology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Dominant physical, chemical, and biological

features of lakes and wetlands: basin geology,
water budget, wind-driven hydromechanical
phenomena, heat balance, thermal stratifica-
tion, radiation environment, biological com-
munities, and cycles of major elements.
Characterization of wetlands, wetland biota,
and chemical conditions of wetlands.
Methodologies of modern limnology, including
field methods and use of models; and current
issues in lake and wetland management. Alter-
nate years.

H. F. Hemond

1.76 Aquatic Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.11
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantitative treatment of chemical processes

in aquatic systems. A brief review of chemical
thermodynamics and kinetics is followed by
studies of acid-base, precipitation-dissolution,
coordination, and reduction-oxidation reactions
of interest in systems such as lakes, oceans,
rivers, estuaries, groundwaters, and waste-
waters. Emphasis on equilibrium calculations
in model systems as a tool for understanding
the variables that govern the chemical com-
position of aquatic systems and the fate of inor-
ganic pollutants. 5.60 is a suggested
prerequisite. Suitable for advanced under-
graduates.

B. Voelker

1.761 Environmental Chemical Kinetics
(New)

Prereq.: 1.76 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced subject emphasizing kinetics and

mechanisms of chemical processes in aquatic
systems such as surface waters, ground-
waters, wastewaters, and cloudwaters. Topics
include coordination and redox chemistry, reac-
tions at the solid-solution interface (such as for-
mation and dissolution of minerals,
coagulation, and sorption), photochemistry,
and radical chemistry. Offered alternate years.
B. Voelker

1.77 Water Quality Control

Prereq.: 1.05
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasis on mathematical models for predict-
ing distribution and fate of effluents discharged
into lakes, reservoirs, rivers, estuaries, and
oceans. Focuses on formulation and structure
of models as well as analytical and simple
numerical solution techniques. Role of element
cycles, such as oxygen, nitrogen, and phos-
phorus, as water quality indicators. Offshore
outfalls and diffusion. Salinity intrusion in es-
tuaries. Thermal stratification, eutrophication,
and sedimentation processes in lakes and
reservoirs. Core requirement for Environmen-
tal M.Eng. program.

E. E. Adams

1.782 Environmental and
Geoenvironmental Engineering M.Eng.
Project

(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Limited to Course 1 M.Eng. Students
G (Fall, |AP, Spring)
5-0-10

Core requirement for Environmental and
Geoenvironmental M.Eng. program. Designed
to teach about environmental restoration en-
gineering through the use of case studies,
computer software tools, and seminars from in-
dustrial experts. The MMR Superfund site lo-
cated at Otis Air National Guard Base is the
case study on which lectures and student
projects are based. Topics include
groundwater modeling theory, legislative
framework and regulations, geotechnical en-
gieering, environmental chemistry, risk
analysis and risk management, remediation
goals, site characterization, remediation tech-
nologies, site closure and pollution prevention.
Students must register for 1.782 for both IAP
and spring term.

F. Perkins

1.80 Fundamentals of Ecology
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-1-8 REST

Basic subject dealing with the science of ecol-
ogy; principles of interrelationships between or-
ganisms and their environment. Development
of basic concepts of energy flow and
biogeochemical cycles in ecosystems; produc-
tivity; trophic dynamics; community structure
and stability; competition and predation; evolu-
tion and natural selection; population growth;
and physiological ecology. Emphasis on
aquatic systems.

S.W. Chisholm

1.81J Chemicals in the Environment:
Toxicology

(Same subject as TOX.104J, TPP.53J)
Prereq.: 5.11, 7.012/7.013/7.014

U (Spring)

3-0-9

See description under subject TOX.104J.
W. G. Thilly

Descriptions of Subjects 311


--- 01.pdf Page 16 ---
School of Engineering

1.811J Environmental Law: Pollution
Control

(Same subject as TPP.33J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews and analyzes Federal and state

regulation of air and water pollution and haz-
ardous wastes. Emphasizes use of legal
mechanisms and alternative approaches (such
as economic incentives) to control pollution
and encourage chemical accident and pollu-
tion prevention. Focuses on the major Federal
legislation, the underlying administrative sys-
tem, and the common law in analyzing the
goals of pollution control and pollution preven-
tion, economic consequences, and the role of
the courts. Discusses both classical pollutants
and toxic industrial chemicals. Also provides
an introduction to basic legal skills.

N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart

1.812J Regulation of Chemicals, Radiation,
and Biotechnology

(Same subject as TPP.34J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on policy design and evaluation in the

regulation of hazardous substances and
processes. Includes risk assessment, hazard-
ous chemical wastes, toxic air and water pol-
lutants, pesticides, food additives,
pharmaceuticals, radiation and radioactive
wastes, product safety, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, workplace hazards, indoor air pol-
lution, biotechnology, and victims’ compensa-
tion. Both health and economic consequences
of regulation discussed.

N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart

1.814J Industrial Ecology

(Same subject as TPP.123J, 3.560J)
Prereq.: TPP.11 or 3.56

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject TPP.123J.

J. Clark, F. Field, R. de Neufville

1.82 Problems in Aquatic Biology and
Chemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced topics in fields of aquatic chemistry,

aquatic biology, and oceanography. Choice of
independent study, seminar, laboratory, or
field studies. Typical topics include nutrient
and trace-metal interactions with aquatic biota,
biogeochemical cycles, current issues in
oceanography.

S. W. Chisholm

1.83 Environmental Organic Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.12, 5.60
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the processes affecting
anthropogenic organic compounds in the en-
vironment. Uses physical chemical properties
to predict chemical transfers between
environmental compartments (air, water, sedi-
ments, biota). Uses molecular structure-reac-
tivity relationships to estimate chemical,
photochemical, and biochemical transforma-
tion rates. Resulting process models are com-
bined to predict environmental concentrations
(and related biological exposures) of hazard-
ous and natural organic compounds.

P. M. Gschwend

1.85 Wastewater Treatment Engineering

Prereq.: 1.05 or 1.80
G (Spring)
3-0-6

Theory and design of systems for treating

municipal wastewater. Methods for charac-
terizing wastewater properties. Physical,
chemical, and biological processes, including
primary treatment, and suspended growth and
fixed-film methods for secondary treatment.
Nutrient removal. Reactor design and process
kinetics. State-of-the-art processes. Sludge
processing and disposal. Field trip to local was-
tewater treatment plant.

A. Pincince

1.89 Environmental Microbiology

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A general microbiology subject dealing with

the function of microorganisms in environmen-
tal processes. Topics include microbial cell
structure, bioenergetics, microbial growth, mac-
romolecular structures, microbial fermenta-
tions, elemental cycles, microbial ecology,
biodegradation of wastes, and metal transfor-
mations.

Staff

Special Studies

1.UR Research in Civil and Environmental
Engineering

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

1.URG Research in Civil and Environmental

Engineering
Prereq.: —
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Individual research or laboratory study under

faculty supervision. Also opportunities in ongo-
ing research program.
Information: A. J. Whittle.

1.91 Civil and Environmental Engineering
Internship

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

1.92 Advanced Civil and Environmental
Engineering Internship

Prereq.: 1.91
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

1.91 provides credit for the first two work as-
signments of Course | students affiliated with
the Engineering Internship Program. 1.92
provides credit for the third and fourth work as-
signments for students affiliated with the En-
gineering Internship Program. Students
register for both 1.91 and 1.92 twice and must
complete both work assignments in order to
receive academic credit for the subjects. Enroll-
ment limited to students registered in the
Course | Internship Option.

Information: O. Buyukozturk.

1.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., M.Eng., C.E., Ph.D., or
Sc.D. thesis; to be arranged by the student
and an appropriate MIT faculty member. Con-
sult Department Academic Programs Office.
Consult Department Academic Programs Of-
fice.

1.961-1.966 Special Graduate Studies in
Civil and Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Graduate subjects taught experimentally; spe-
cial subjects offered by visiting faculty; semi-
nars on topics of current interest.

Information: J. Sussman.

1.968 Graduate Studies in Civil and
Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual study, research, or laboratory inves-
tigations at the graduate level, under faculty
supervision.

Information: J. Sussman.

1.969 Graduate Studies in Civil and
Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual study, research, or laboratory inves-
tigations at the graduate level, under faculty
supervision.

Information: J. Sussman.

312 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 17 ---
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering Course 1

1.970-1.977 Special Graduate Studies in
Civil and Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Graduate subjects taught experimentally; spe-
cial subjects offered by visiting faculty; semi-
nars on topics of current interest.

information: J. Sussman.

1.978-1.979 Special Graduate Studies in
Civil and Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Graduate subjects taught experimentally; spe-
cial subjects offered by visiting faculty; semi-
nars on topics of current interest. 1.978 is
taught P/D/F.

information: J. Sussman.

1.980J Thesis Proposal Seminar

(Same subject as TPP.14J)

Prereq.: Thesis Registration
G (Fall, |AP)

1-0-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject TPP.14J.
R. de Neufville, J. Ehrenfeld, R. Tabors

1.982 Research in Civil and Environmental
Engineering

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

For research assistants in the department,
when assigned research is not used for thesis,
but is approved for academic credit. Credit for
this subject may not be used for any degree
granted by Course I.

J. Sussman

1.983 Teaching in Civil and Environmental
Engineering

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

For teaching assistants in recognition of educa-
tional value derived from satisfactory perfor-
mance of assigned duties, and for other
qualified students interested in teaching as a
career. Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teach-
ing under supervision of a faculty member.
Credit for this subject may not be used for any
degree granted by Course |.

J. Sussman

1.991, 1.992 Special Undergraduate Studies
in Civil and Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate subjects taught experimentally;

special subjects offered by visiting faculty;
seminars on topics of current interest. 1.991 is
taught P/D/F.

Information: O. S. Madsen.

1.993-1.995 Special Undergraduate Studies
in Civil and Environmental Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate subjects taught experimentally;
special subjects offered by visiting faculty;
seminars on topics of current interest. 1.995 is
graded. Other numbers are taught P/D/F.
Information: O. S. Madsen.

1.999 Undergraduate Studies in Civil and
Environmental Engineering ;

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual study, research, or laboratory inves-
tigations under faculty supervision.
Information: O. S. Madsen.

Descriptions of Subjects 313


--- 01.pdf Page 18 ---
School of Engineering

Course 2

Mechanical Engineering

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.

2.UR Undergraduate Research in
Mechanical Engineering

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

2.URG Undergraduate Research in
Mechanical Engineering

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual study, research, or laboratory inves-

tigations under faculty supervision, including in-
dividual participation in an ongoing research
project. See projects listing in Undergraduate
Office, 1-104, for guidance.

Coordinator: D. Rowell.

2.001 Mechanics and Materials |
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02
U (Fall, Spring)
3-1-5 REST

Introduction to statics and the mechanics of

deformable solids. Emphasis on the three
basic principles of equilibrium, geometric com-
patibility, and material behavior. Stress and its
relation to force and moment; strain and its
relation to displacement; linear elasticity with
thermal expansion. Failure modes. Application
to simple engineering structures such as rods,
shafts, beams, and trusses. Application to
design.

R. Abeyaratne, F. Feng, D. M. Parks

2.002 Mechanics and Materials II
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 2.001
U (Fall, Spring)
3-2-7

Introduces mechanical behavior of engineering

materials, and the use of materials in mechani-
cal design. Emphasizes the fundamentals of
mechanical behavior of materials, as well as
design with materials. Major topics: elasticity,
plasticity, limit analysis, fatigue, fracture, and
composites. Materials selection. Laboratory ex-
periments involving projects related to
materials in mechanical design.

L. Anand, D. M. Parks, M. C. Boyce

2.003 Systems Modeling and Dynamics |

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 REST

Introduction to physical system dynamics, em-

phasizing the common d behavior of
mechanical, electrical, fluid, and thermal
devices and how they interact. Unified mathe-
matical modeling using linear and non-linear
lumped multiport elements. Introduction to
matrix methods and computer analysis of sys-
tem dynamics. Concept of state and formula-
tion of state equations. Dynamic response and
stability of linear systems. Frequency response
functions, pole-zero configurations, and their in-
terpretation. Generalized impedance and
source equivalents. Extensive use of engineer-
ing examples.

D. Rowell

2.004J Systems Modeling and Dynamics Il
(Revised Units)

(Same subject as 2.03J, 13.013)
Prereq.: 2.001 and 2.003 or 13.015
U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-5

Introduction to dynamics and vibration of
lumped-parameter models of mechanical sys-
tems. Distinction between force-momentum
and work-energy formulations. Three-dimen-
sional particle kinematics. Newton-Euler equa-
tions. Lagrange’s equations. Historical
citations. Issues of perspective including
relationships of dynamics to design.

J. H. Williams, Jr., J. K. Vandiver

2.005 Thermal-Fluids Engineering |

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 REST

Equilibrium thermodynamics and its applica-
tion to engineering systems involving energy
exchange and conversion. Concepts of work,
heat, and internal energy; The First Law. Re-
versibility, entropy, and The Second Law. Ther-
modynamics of state of pure substances.
Applications to processes and power cycles.
Modes of heat transfer. Conduction, applica-
tions using lumped capacity and thermal resis-
tance concepts, finned surfaces. Elements of
radiation.

J. Brisson, J. Heywood

2.006 Thermal-Fluids Engineering II

Prereq.: 2.005, 18.03
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8

Mechanics of incompressible flow in engineer-
ing systems. Hydrostatics. Mass conservation.
Inviscid flow analysis and Bernoulli equation.
Linear and angular momentum. Application to
fluid machines. Analysis of laminar viscous
flow in channels and passages. Turbulence.
Head loss in pipes. Boundary layers, drag.
Forced and natural convective heat transfer in
laminar and turbulent flow in channels and
over surfaces. Heat exchangers.

R. Kamm

2.007 Design and Manufacturing |

Prereq.: 2.670
U (Spring)
3-3-6

Develops students’ competence and self-con-
fidence as designers. Emphasis on the crea-
tive design process for individuals. Synthesis,
analysis, and robustness as complements.
Subject relies on active learning through exer-
cises in lecture and laboratory. A major design-
and-build project is featured. Lecture topics
include idea generation, estimation, concept
selection, visual thinking and communication,
kinematics of mechanisms, design for
manufacturing, and designer's professional
responsibilities. Several manufacturing techni-
ques featured in 2.008 are used in fabrication
of designs.

A. H. Slocum

2.008 Design and Manufacturing Il

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.003, 2.007, 2.005
U (Fall, Spring)
3-5-4 Institute LAB

Integration of design, engineering, and
management disciplines and practices for
analysis and design of manufacturing
enterprises. Emphasis is on the physics and
stochastic nature of manufacturing processes
and systems, and their effects on quality, rate,
cost, and flexibility. Topics include process
physics and control, design for manufacturing,
and manufacturing systems. Group project re-
quires design and fabrication of parts using
mass-production and assembly methods to
produce a product in quantity. Six units may
be applied to the General Institute Lab Re-
quirement.

J.-H. Chun, E. M. Sachs

314 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 19 ---
Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2

2.010 Control System Principles
(New)

Prereq.: 2.003, 18.03, 2.004

U (Fall, Spring)

S24 bbicseeieme tae) WOE
Introduction to feedback control of physical sys-
tem behavior. State-space and functional
descriptions of linear and nonlinear systems.
Feedback, stability, and robustness. Poles and
zeroes. Transient response shaping. Natural
frequencies, normal coordinates, and modes.
Full-state and output feedback. Frequency
response methods. Root locus. Bode plots.
Stability margins. Design of PID controllers

and compensators. Introduction to digital con-
trol. Extensive case studies emphasizing com-
puter analysis and design of electro-
mechanical, pneumatic, hydraulic, and
electronic control systems.

A. M. Annaswamy

Mechanics, Dynamics, and
Acoustics

2.03J Dynamics

(Same subject as 2.004J, 13.013J)

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.004, and 2.02 or 2.003, 18.03
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall, Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

4-0-8

See description under subject 2.004J.
J. H. Williams, Jr., J. K. Vandiver

2.032 Dynamics

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Momentum principles and energy principles.
Lagrange’s equations, Hamilton's principle. Ap-
plications to mechanical systems including
gyroscopic effects. Study of steady motions
and nature of small deviations therefrom.
Natural modes and natural frequencies for con-
tinuous and lumped parameter systems.

Forced vibrations. Dynamic stability theory.
Causes of instability.

J. H. Williams, Jr.

2.034 Nonlinear Dynamics

Prereq.: 2.032

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A unified treatment of nonlinear phenomena in
the dynamics of discrete and continuous sys-
tems. Qualitative methods of analysis, phase
plane techniques. Quantitative analysis of
weakly nonlinear systems in free and forced
vibrations; perturbation methods, nonlinear
resonances, self-excited oscillations, lock-in
phenomena. Introduction to nonlinear stability
and bifurcation theory, chaotic behavior, non-
linear wave propagation, solitons. Applications
are made to mechanical, fluid, electrical, and
flow-structure interaction problems.

T. R. Akylas

2.05 Kinematics and Dynamics of
Mechanisms and Manipulators

Prereq.: 2.03
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes kinematic and dynamic charac-

teristics of planar and spatial mechanisms, in-
cluding machines and robotic manipulators.
Use of vector, graphical, and 4 by 4 matrix
methods for kinematic analysis. An introduc-
tion to graphical and computer methods for
kinematic synthesis of mechanisms. Methods
for dynamic analysis of mechanisms, and the
use of digital simulation techniques. Systems
include rigid and flexible elements and active
control systems. Applications from industrial
machine systems and robotic manipulators.
S. Dubowsky

2.06J Mechanical Vibration
(Revised Units)

(Same subject as 13.80J, 13.801)
Prereq.: 2.004J

U (Spring)

3-1-8

Elective unit distribution: Advanced discipli-

nary, 9; Lab, 3. See description under subject
13.80J.
F. Feng, J. K. Vandiver

2.060J Principles of Acoustics

(Same subject as 13.81J)

Prereq.: 13.013J or 2.03 or 16.040, 18.075
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

With subject 2.063J, forms a two-term se-

quence of advanced acoustics; to be taken in
either order. Acoustics of fluids, sources of
sound, radiation, diffraction and scattering.
Energy density and intensity, radiation im-
pedance and directivity. Reciprocity.

Staff

2.061 Random Vibration

Prereq.: 2.03J, 18.075

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Description of stochastic processes. Impulse

response and frequency response of linear
time-invariant dynamic systems. Correlations
and spectra of stationary response. Crossing
rates, peaks, and envelopes. Failure under ran-
dom loading. Poisson pulse processes. Meas-
urement, identification, and response
problems. Coherence. Space-time correlations
and cross-spectra. Digital data processing.
Spectral analysis. Applications to vehicles and
structures subjected to wide-band random ex-
citation.

F. Feng

2.062 Wave Propagation

Prereq.: 2.03J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Wave concepts in applied mechanics with ex-
amples chosen from elasticity, acoustics,
geophysics, hydrodynamics, and related sub-
jects. Plane wave theory, dispersion, phase
and group velocities, wave impedance, energy
density and intensity. Theory of characteristics.
Reflection and refraction, wave guides, and
boundary waves. WKB method, Green's law,
and wave action. Generation, transmission,
and reception of waves. Water waves,
Rayleigh waves, waves in periodic structures.
T. R. Akylas

2.063J Sound and Structural Vibration

(Same subject as 13.82J)

Prereq.: 2.03J or 16.040 or 18.075
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

With subject 2.060J, forms a two-term se-
quence in acoustics at advanced level; to be
taken in either order. Transmission of vibration
in structures and interaction with sound fields.
Dynamics of sound fields and longitudinal,
shear, and flexural vibrations. Normal modes,
phase and group velocity, energy decay.
Radiation impedance and input and transfer
mobility of structural elements. Statistical ener-
gy analysis, reciprocity, energy sharing be-
tween structures and sound fields.

Staff

2.067J Structural Acoustics

(Same subject as 13.83J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

This advanced-level subject deals with various
topics in the transmission of vibrational energy
through structures, and the interaction of struc-
tural vibrations with surrounding and contained
fluid regions. Faculty members will lead discus-
sions of these topics using published papers
and research reports. Topics will vary depend-
ing on research activities in the Structural
Acoustics Program. A good background in
dynamics, applied mathematics, and structural
mechanics will be assumed. Background
courses in acoustics and structural wave
propagation are recommended.

Staff

2.072 Mechanics of Continuous Media

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles and applications of continuum
mechanics. Kinematics of deformation. Ther-
momechanical conservation laws. Stress and
strain measures. Constitutive equations. Solu-
tion of some basic problems for various
materials as relevant in materials science,
geomechanics, fluid dynamics, and structural
analysis. Inherently nonlinear phenomena in
continuum mechanics.

R. Abeyaratne

Descriptions of Subjects 315


--- 01.pdf Page 20 ---
School of Engineering

2.073 Solid Mechanics — Plasticity and
Inelastic Deformation

Prereq.: 2.30
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Physical basis of plastic/inelastic deformation
of solids. Continuum constitutive models for
small and large deformation of elastic-
(visco)plastic solids. Analytical and numerical
solution of selected boundary value problems.
Applications to deformation processing of me-
tals. .

L. Anand, D. M. Parks, M. C. Boyce

2.083 Applied Elasticity

Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002, 18.03
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the theory and applications of
elastic solids. Review strain, stress, and stress-
strain law. Several of the following topics:
Anisotropic material behavior. Piezoelectric
materials. Effective properties of composites.
Structural mechanics of beams and plates.
Energy methods for structures. Two-dimen-
sional problems. Stress concentration at
cavities, concentrated loads, cracks, and dis-
locations. Variational methods and their ap-
plications; introduction to the finite element
method. Introduction to wave propagation.

J. H. Williams, Jr., R. Abeyaratne

2.084J Structural Mechanics in Nuclear
Power Technology

(Same subject as 22.314J, 1.56J, 13.14J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.314J.
J. E. Meyer, O. Buyukozturk

2.093 Computer Methods in Dynamics

Prereq.: 2.03J, 18.075
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Formulation of finite element methods for
analysis of dynamic problems in solids, struc-
tures, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer. Com-
puter calculation of matrices and numerical
solution of equilibrium equations by direct in-
tegration and mode superposition. Effective
eigensolution techniques for calculation of fre-
quencies and mode shapes. Digital computer
coding techniques and use of an existing
general purpose finite element analysis pro-
gram. Modeling of problems and interpretation
of numerical results.

K. J. Bathe

2.094 Finite Element Analysis of Solids and
Fluids

Prereq.: 2.01 or 2.001, 18.075
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic principles of continuum mechanics and

finite element methods, modern application to
solution of practical problems in solid, struc-
tural, and fluid mechanics, heat and mass
transfer, other field problems. Kinematics of
deformation, strain and stress measures, con-
Stitutive relations, conservation laws, virtual
work, and variational principles. Discretization
of governing equations using finite element
methods. Solution of central problems using
existing computer programs.

K. J. Bathe

System Dynamics and
Control

2.100 Information and Probability
(New)

Prereq.: 2.003
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Robots, gas turbines, and toasters share a

common feature: they have to get and process
information in order to function. Subject
provides an introduction to information theory
as applied to problems in control, design, and
manufacturing. Topics treated include prob-
ability and statistics, channel capacity and com-
munications, the characterization and control
of noisy systems, the generation and propaga-
tion of errors in manufacturing, and the
mechanics and design of information-process-
ing devices. Elective unit distribution: ad-
vanced disciplinary, 9; design, 3.

S. Lloyd

2.101 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00

U (Spring)

3-1-8

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

F. Pefia-Mora

2.141 Modeling and Simulation of Dynamic
Systems

Prereq.: 2.151
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mathematical modeling of complex engineer-
ing systems at a level of detail compatible with
the design and implementation of modern con-
trol systems. Wave-like and diffusive energy
transmission systems. Multiport energy storing
fields and dissipative fields; consequences of
symmetry and asymmetry. Nonlinear
mechanics and canonical transformation
theory. Examples will include mechanisms,
electromechanical transducers, electronic sys-
tems, fluid systems, thermal systems, compres-
sible flow processes, chemical processes.

N. Hogan

2.151 Advanced System Dynamics and
Control

Prereq.: 2.02 or 2.003, 2.14, 18.06
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analytical and graphical descriptions of state-
determined dynamic physical systems; time
and frequency domain representations; sys-
tem characteristics — controllability, obser-
vability, stability; linear and nonlinear system
responses. Modification of system charac-
teristics using feedback. State observers, Kal-
man filters. Modeling/performance trade-offs in
control system design. Emphasis on applica-
tion of techniques to physical systems.

K. Youcef-Toumi, N. Hogan, D. Rowell

2.152 Nonlinear Control System Design

Prereq.: 2.151 or 6.241 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to applied nonlinear control. Non-
linear stability theory, Lyapunov analysis,
Barbalat’s lemma. Feedback linearization, in-
ternal dynamics. Sliding surfaces. Adaptive
nonlinear control. Stable neural network con-
trol, multiresolution analysis. Emphasis on ap-
plications to physical systems (robots, aircraft,
spacecraft, underwater vehicles).

J.-J. E. Slotine

2.153 Adaptive Control: Theory and
Applications

Prereq.: 2.151
G (Fall)
3-2-7

A graduate subject on the basic principles of
adaptive controllers. Topics include adaptive
controllers for first- and second-order systems,
strictly positive real-transfer functions, persist-
ent excitation, stability of general adaptive sys-
tems, minimum variance and LQ-controllers,
n-step ahead predictive controllers, robustness
properties, adaptive control of nonlinear sys-
tems, and connections to feedback lineariza-
tion, gain-scheduling, and neural networks.
Laboratory exercises pertain to the implemen-
tation of adaptive PID controllers in mechani-
cal systems.

A. M. Annaswamy

316 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 21 ---
Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2

2.156J Dynamics of Nonlinear Systems

(Same subject as 6.243J, 16.337J)
Prereq.: 18.100, 6.241

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Alternate years. See description under subject

6.243J.
N. Hogan, J. L. Wyatt, Jr., M. Dahleh, R. Ram-
nath

2.157J Design and Implementation of

Computer-Aided Engineering Systems

(Same subject as 1.127J, 13.471J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Overview of existing CAE systems; architec-

ture of high-performance graphic displays in
engineering workstations; orthographic and
perspective display transformations;

parametric representation of curves and sur-
faces; elementary differential geometry; inter-
active graphics; bicubic surface patches;

image generation; NC tool paths; solid model-
ing; advanced research topics; project
management for software development. Group
projects emphasize CAE system development.
Programming proficiency in C required.

D. C. Gossard, N. M. Patrikalakis

2.1583 Computational Geometry

(Same subject as 13.472J, 1.128J)
Prereq.: 13.471J/2.157J or 6.837
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.472J.
N. M. Patrikalakis, D. C. Gossard

2.159J Computer Aided Engineering |

(Same subject as 1.124J, 13.470J)
Prereq.: 1.00 and knowledge of C
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.124J.
Jn. R. Williams

2.160 Intelligent Control and Sensing

Prereq.: 2.151 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces techniques of learning, adaptation,

and high-level control. Neural networks; as-
sociative memory, multi-layer neural nets,
error back propagation, recurrent nets, reinfor-
cement leaming, and function approximation
using radial basis functions, Introduction to
fuzzy sets, fuzzy linguistic control, frame-
based systems, and expert control systems.
Applications to robots, vehicles, manufacturing
Processes, and various physical plants. Com-
puter laboratories and term projects. Program-
ming experience is recommended.

H. Asada, J.-J. E. Slotine

2.165 Robotics and Mechatronics

Prereq.: 2.151 and 2.004 or permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Dynamic analysis, design, and control of
robots and electromechanical systems.
Kinematics and dynamics of multi-input, multi-
output rigid body systems. Inverse kinematics,
inverse dynamics, and computed torque con-
trol. Adaptive and learning control. Force feed-
back, and visual servoing. Programming, task
strategy planning, and teleoperation. Ac-
tuators, sensors, and component technology.
Integrated mechanism/control design; mode)-
ing and control of flexible robots and struc-
tures. Digital implementation of control
algorithms; experiments using table-top
robots; term projects; and laboratory
demonstrations.

H. Asada, J.-J. E. Slotine, K. Youcef-Toumi

2.171 Analysis and Design of Digital
Control Systems

Prereq.: 2.010, 2.151
G (Spring)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A comprehensive introduction to control sys-

tem synthesis in which the digital computer
plays a major role, reinforced with hands-on
laboratory experience. Covers elements of real-
time computer architecture; input-output inter-
faces and data converters; analysis and
synthesis of sampled-data control systems
using classical and modern (state-space)
methods; analysis of trade-offs in control algo-
rithms for computation speed and quantization
effects. Laboratory projects emphasize practi-
cal digital servo interfacing and implementation
problems with timing, noise, nonlinear devices.
D. Trumper, D. Rowell

2.181J Human Factors Engineering

(Subject meets with 16.453J, 16.400)
Prereq.: 2.010 or 16.060

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 16.453J.
T. B. Sheridan, L. R. Young

2.182J Human Supervisory Control of
Telerobots and Flight Vehicles

(Same subject as 16.422J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of supervisory control and
telerobotics. Different levels of automation are
discussed, as well as the allocation of roles
and authority between humans and machines.
Human-vehicle interface design in highly
automated systems. Decision aiding.
Tradeoffs between human control and human
monitoring. Automated alerting systems and
human intervention in automatic operation. En-
hanced human interface technologies such as
virtual presence. Performance, optimization,
and social implications of the human-automat-
ion system. Examples from aerospace,
ground, and undersea vehicles, robotics, and
industrial systems.

T. B. Sheridan, R. J. Hansman

2.183 Biomechanics and Neural Control of
Movement

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Normal and pathological sensory-motor be-
havior of biological systems emerges from a
complex interplay of biomechanical and neural
factors. Experimentally supported theories of
biological motor control, emphasizing
manipulation and tool use, are critiqued and
compared with robotic approaches. Topics in-
clude hierarchical organization, intermittency,
optimization theories, kinematic redundancy,
neuromuscular dynamics and segmental feed-
back, “equilibrium-point” theories, instabilities
in contact tasks, co-contraction strategies, and
impedance control.

N. Hogan

2.192 Engineering Systems Analysis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

R. de Neutville, J. P. Clark, F. Field

Fluid Mechanics and
Combustion

2.25 Advanced Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 2.006; 18.075 or 18.085
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of principal concepts and methods of
fluid dynamics. Mass conservation, momen-
tum and energy equations for continua. Sur-
face tension. Navier-Stokes equations for
viscous flows. Similarity and dimensional
analysis. Lubrication theory. Boundary layers
and separation. Circulation and vorticity
theorems. Potential flow. Introduction to tur-
bulence. Lift and drag.

A. A. Sonin

2.273 Turbulent Flow and Transport

Prereq.: 2.25
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Turbulent flows, with emphasis on engineering
methods. Governing equations for momentum,
energy, and species transfer. Turbulence: its
production, dissipation, and scaling laws.
Averaged (Reynolds) equations for momen-
tum, energy, and species transfer. Simple
closure approaches for free and bounded tur-
bulent shear flows: jets, pipe and channel
flows, boundary layers, buoyant plumes and
thermals, dispersion problems, etc., including
heat and species transport as well as flow
fields. Introduction to more complex closure
schemes and statistical methods in turbulence.
A. A. Sonin

Descriptions of Subjects 317


--- 01.pdf Page 22 ---
School of Engineering

2.274 Computational Fluid Dynamics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Modern treatment of finite element methods

for incompressible viscous fluid flows. Formula-
tion, theoretical analysis, implementation, and
application of discretizations and direct/itera-
tive solvers for elliptic, Stokes, convection-dif-
fusion, and Navier-Stokes equations.
Finite-difference/finite-element treatment of
mixed initial/boundary value problems. Com-
puter assignments requiring programming.

A. T. Patera

2.277 Biomedical Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 2.006
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering approach to the function of cir-

culatory and respiratory systems and to other
problems in physiology involving fluid
dynamics. Reviews relevant anatomy and
physiology emphasizing quantitative considera-
tions. Presents and discusses mathematical or
engineering models in relation to physiological
phenomena they are intended to simulate.
Directed to graduate students in engineering
and science, but open to medical students and
undergraduates with the permission of the in-
structor.

C. F. Dewey, R. D. Kamm

2.280 Fundamentals and Modeling in
Combustion

Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals and modeling of physical gas

dynamics and combustion using analytical and
numerical methods. Conservation equations of
reacting flows. Chemical the’ and
kinetics. Non-equilibrium flow. Detonation and
boundary layers. Ignition, flammability, and ex-
tinction. Premixed and diffusion flames. Com-
bustion instabilities. Supersonic combustion.
Turbulent combustion. Fire, safety, and en-
vironmental impact.

A. F. Ghoniem

2.29J Air Pollution Control

(Same subject as 10.571J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 10.571J.
G. J. McRae

Materials

(See also listings under Polymers and
Fibers.)

2.30 Mechanical Behavior of Materials
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 2.001
U (Fall)
3-2-10

Introduces mechanical behavior of engineering

materials, and the use of materials in mechani-
cal design. Emphasizes both the fundamentals
of mechanical behavior of materials as well as
design with materials. Major topics: elasticity,
plasticity, limit analysis, fatigue, fracture, and
composites. Materials selection. Laboratory ex-
periments involving projects related to
materials in mechanical design. Limited enroll-
ment.

L. Anand, D. M. Parks, M. C. Boyce

2.302 Physics of Inelastic Deformation of
Solids

Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002 or 2.305
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Rate mechanisms in crystal plasticity, kinetics

and dynamics of slip, superposition of flow
stress mechanisms. Inelastic deformation in
non-metals, visco-plasticity of metallic, inor-
ganic, and polymeric glasses; plasticity of crys-
talline polymers; statistical theory of
elastomeric behavior. Macro-plasticity in
polycrystalline metals and in polymers. Strain
hardening and recovery. Macroscopic three-
dimensional constitutive relations for inelastic
deformation usable in computational
mechanics. Alternate years.

A. S. Argon

2.303 Micro Mechanisms of Fracture

Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002 or 2.305
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental crack tip solutions. Cohesive

strength of pure solids and interfaces. Micro-
crack initiation. Brittle fracture in tension and
compression. Static fatigue. Toughening of brit-
tle solids by crack tip shielding and trapping or
bridging. Ductile fracture by plastic cavitation.
Intergranular fracture at elevated tempera-
tures. Brittle to ductile transitions in fracture.
Fracture under cyclic loading. Fracture of com-
posites. Fracture along interfaces. Examples
drawn from all prominent structural solids. Al-
ternate years.

A. S. Argon

2.305 Advanced Mechanical Behavior of
Materials

Prereq.: 2.001, 3.091
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of the mechanical behavior of
engineering materials and their uses in struc-
tural and design-related applications is
presented, starting from a mechanistic point of
view to arrive at phenomenological forms of
constitutive behavior for deformation and frac-
ture. Problems involving elasticity, plasticity,
creep, visco-elasticity, and monotonic and
cyclic fracture are discussed, including applica-
tions to material processing.

A. S. Argon, M. C. Boyce

2.306 Dislocations and Mechanical
Properties of Crystalline Solids

Prereq.: 2.30 or 2.002, 3.091
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Derivation of properties of both straight and
curved dislocations from elasticity. Interaction
of dislocations with external stresses, with
each other, with free surfaces, interfaces, and
cracks. Dislocations in specific crystal struc-
tures: stress fields, line energies, line tension.
Kinematics of dislocation glide and climb.
Dynamics of moving dislocations. Interaction
of dislocations with point defects and climb.
Dislocation multiplication. Athermal
mechanisms of strain hardening in both
homogeneous and heterogeneous crystals.
A. S. Argon

2.31 Finite Element Analysis in Computer
Aided Mechanical Design
(New)

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.002
U (Spring)
3-3-6

Focuses on the role of finite element analysis
in computer aided mechanical design. Introduc-
tion to the finite element method for problems
involving elastic, thermo-elastic, and elastic-
plastic material behavior together with stiff-
ness, strength and toughness-related material
properties which limit mechanical design. Ap-
proximations inherent in numerical analyses
discussed and the physical interpretations of
the results emphasized. Projects emphasize
the various iterative loops between the dif-
ferent phases of the “design/analysis/manufac-
ture/test” philosophy of mechanical design.
Elective unit distribution: Advanced discipli-
nary, 6; Design, 3; Lab, 3.

M. C. Boyce, L. Anand, D. M. Parks

318 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 23 ---
Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2

Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics

2.41J Thermal Power Engineering

(Same subject as 13.25J)

Prereq.: 2.005

U (Spring)

3-0-9

Examines current and future thermal power
systems. Introduction to combustion and the
design of turbomachinery. Analyses of various
power plants including Rankine, Brayton, Otto,
Diesel, and refrigerating systems. Applications
include land-based and marine power plants.
Consideration of pollution and environmental
issues.

E. G. Cravalho, A. D. Carmichael

2.45J Fundamentals of Energy in Buildings

(Same subject as 4.42J, 1.42J)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02

U (Fall)

3-0-9 REST

See description under subject 4.42J.
L. R. Glicksman

2.451J General Thermodynamics

(Same subject as 22.571J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General foundations of thermodynamics valid
for small and large systems, and equilibrium
and nonequilibrium states. Definitions of work,
energy, stable equilibrium, available energy,
entropy, thermodynamic potential, and interac-
tions other than work (nonwork, heat, mass
transfer). Applications to properties of
materials, bulk flow, energy conversion, chemi-
cal equilibrium, combustion, and industrial
manufacturing.

J. L. Smith

2.46J Analysis and Design of Heating,
Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Systems
(New)

(Same subject as 4.427J)
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.51

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the fundamentals of heating, ventilat-
ing, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems. Dis-
cussion of psychrometrics, air conditioning
processes, thermal comfort, indoor air quality
and outdoor design conditions; concentration
on the calculation of heating and cooling load
in order to size suitable HVAC equipment; es-
timation of energy consumption of the HVAC
equipment. Introduces both manual and com-
puter methods. One site visit.

Q. Chen

Heat and Mass Transfer

2.51 Heat and Mass Transfer Engineering

Prereq.: 2.006
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9

Analysis, modeling, and design of heat and

mass transfer processes in manufacturing,
machinery, energy production, and energy
management technologies. Heat conduction in
solids: steady and transient states, finned sur-
faces, numerical simulation tools. Heat transfer
associated with laminar and turbulent flow of
fluids in free and forced convection. Heat trans-
fer in boiling and condensation. Heat ex-
changer design, including enhanced surface
selection and pressure loss evaluation. Mass
transfer at low rates: evaporation, wet-bulb
temperature, catalysis. Students complete a
creative design project on a problem taken
from industry. Elective unit distribution: Ad-
vanced disciplinary, 9; Design, 3.

J. H. Lienhard, L. R. Glicksman, B. B. Mikic

2.54 Heat Transfer

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-3

Fundamentals of conduction, radiation of heat,

and effects of convection, with applications to
problems arising in practice. Primarily for
selected officers of US Navy and Coast Guard.
B. B. Mikié

2.55 Advanced Heat and Mass Transfer

Prereq.: 2.51
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced treatment of fundamental aspects of

heat and mass transport. Topics covered in-
clude: diffusion kinetics, conservation laws,
some heat conduction, laminar and turbulent
convection, mass transfer including phase
change or heterogeneous reactions, and basic
thermal radiation. Problems and examples in-
clude theory and applications drawn from a
spectrum of engineering design and manufac-
turing problems.

J. H. Lienhard, B. B. Miki¢

2.56 Conduction and Change of Phase Heat
Transfer

Prereq.: 2.51, 18.075
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Solutions of steady and transient heat conduc-

tion problems in orthogonal coordinate sys-
tems with various boundary conditions.
Approximate methods: application of numeri-
cal techniques. Moving boundaries: problems
in freezing and melting. Condensation heat
transfer. Boiling: mechanisms and heat trans-
fer correlations. Thermal modeling of engineer-
ing systems: use of laser in material removal
and processing.

B. B. Miki¢é

2.58J Radiative Transfer
(Revised Units)

(Same subject as 10.74)
Prereq.: 10.302 or 2.51

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of thermal radiations and their ap-
plication to engineering heat transfer
problems. Basic laws of thermal radiation.
Radiative properties of surfaces. Radiant inter-
change among surfaces separated by a
transparent medium. Thermal radiation charac-
teristics of gases and particle clouds. Radiative
interchange through absorbing, emitting, and
scattering media. Application to furnaces, high-
temperature processing, pyrometry, insulation,
and solar energy.

L. R. Glicksman, A. F. Sarofim

Power Systems

2.601J Design of Thermal Power
Systems

(Same subject as 13.26J)
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006, 2.51
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Design of thermal power system components
and system optimization. Reviews gas
dynamics and heat transfer. Design of axial
and centrifugal compressors, and axial and
radial inflow turbines, heat exchangers,
evaporators, boilers, and condensers. Takes
design project examples from the fields of
space, electrical utilities, and marine power
systems. Assumes knowledge of elementary
heat transfer and simple power cycles.

L. R. Glicksman, A. D. Carmichael

2.615 Internal Combustion Engines

Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of how the design and opera-
tion of internal combustion engines affect their
performance and fuel requirements. Study of
fuid flow, thermodynamics, combustion, heat
transfer and friction phenomena, and fuel
properties, relevant to engine power, efficien-
cy, and emissions. Examination of design fea-
tures and operating characteristics of different
types of engines: spark-ignition, diesel,
stratified-charge, and mixed-cycle engines. En-
gine Laboratory project. For graduate and
senior undergraduate students.

J. B. Heywood

Descriptions of Subjects 319


--- 01.pdf Page 24 ---
School of Engineering

2.648 Superconducting Magnets

Prereq.: 2.005, 2.51
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on one important engineering applica-

tion of superconductors — generation of large-
scale and intense magnetic fields. Review of
electromagnetic theory; detailed treatment of
magnet design and operational issues, e.g.,
“usable” superconductors, field and stress
analyses, magnet instabilities, ac losses and
mechanical disturbances, quench and protec-
tion, experimental techniques, cryogenics.
New high-temperature superconductors for
magnets — design and operational issues at
high temperatures.

Y. Iwasa, E. S. Bobrov

Experimental Engineering

2.670 Mechanical Engineering Tools

Prereq.: —
U (IAP)
1-3-2 [P/D/F]

Introduces the fundamentals of machine tool

and computer tool use. Students work with a
variety of machine tools including the
bandsaw, milling machine, and lathe. Instruc-
tion given on the use of the Athena network
and Athena-based software packages includ-
ing MATLAB, MAPLE, XESS, and CAD. Em-
phasis on problem solving, not programming
or algorithmic development. Assignments are
project-oriented relating to mechanical en-
gineering topics. It is recommended that stu-
dents take this subject in the first IAP after
declaring the major in Mechanical Engineering.
D. P. Hart, K. N. Otto

2.671 Measurement and Instrumentation

Prereq.: 2.003, 8.02
U (Fall, Spring)
2-3-7 Institute LAB

Experimental techniques for observation and

measurement of physical variables such as
force, strain, temperature, flowrate, and ac-
celeration. Emphasizes principles of transduc-
tion, measurement circuitry, spectral analysis,
uncertainty analysis, computer-aided ex-
perimentation, and technical reporting. Typical
laboratory experiments involve oscilloscopes,
thermocouples, strain gages, digital recorders,
lasers, etc. Basic material and lab objectives
are developed in lectures. Six units may be ap-
plied to the General Institute Laboratory Re-
quirement. Enrollment may be limited.

J. H. Lienhard, C. F. Dewey

2.672 Project Laboratory

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.003, 2.005, 2.006, 2.671
U (Fall, Spring)

1-3-2 Institute LAB

Engineering laboratory subject for mechanical

engineering juniors and seniors. Major em-
phasis on interplay between analytical and ex-
perimental methods in solution of research
and development problems. Communication
(written and oral) of results is also a strong
component of the course. Groups of two or
three students work together on three projects
during the term. Limited enrollment.

W. Cheng, D. Hart

Design

2.72 Elements of Mechanical Design

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.007
U (Fall)
3-3-6

Examination and practice in the application of

many mechanical design elements, including
control components. Students working in
groups will design, fabricate, and test
prototype devices in response to requests
from industrial sponsors. Topics: typical
machine elements, power transmission ele-
ments, motors and prime movers, control ele-
ments, material selection, and assembly
techniques. It is recommended that students
not take this subject at the same time as 2.73.
Elective unit distribution: Advanced discipli-
nary, 6; design, 6.

C. R. Peterson

2.721 Design for Production

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.007, 2.72, 2.008
U (Spring)
2-3-4

Intended primarily as a follow-up to 2.72. Stu-

dents fabricate and test prototype devices that
have been designed for real clients in 2.72.
Simultaneously, these devices are redesigned
for economical production in light of prototype
experience and accompanying lecture material
on manufacturing processes and materials.

C. R. Peterson

2.73 Design Projects
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 2.007, 2.008

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6

Practice in engineering design through term-

long projects chosen to integrate significant
portions of material covered in prerequisites.
Emphasizes creative solutions to current en-
gineering design problems, team work, and
fabrication of prototypes. Often major involve-
ment of a company in project definition and
teaching. Lectures address the breadth of
topics involved in engineering design from
analytical techniques to human-machine inter-
actions, economics, applied ethics, and patent
laws.

W. C. Flowers, W. Seering

2.737 Mechatronics
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 1.00, 2.010, 6.071, or equivalents; per-
mission of instructor

U (Fall, Spring)

3-5-4

Introduction to designing mechatronic sys-
tems, which require integration of the mechani-
cal and electrical engineering disciplines within
a unified framework. Significant laboratory-
based design experiences form subject's core.
Final project. Topics include: low-level interfac-
ing of software with hardware; use of C lan-
guage and assembly language to implement
real-time tasks; digital logic; analog interfacing
and power amplifiers; measurement and sens-
ing; electromagnetic and optical transducers;
control of mechatronic systems. Limited enroll-
ment. Elective unit distribution: Advanced dis-
ciplinary, 3, design 3, lab 6.

D. Trumper, K. Youcef-Toumi

2.739J Product Design and Development

(Same subject as 15.783J)

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or 2.731 or 2.73 or
permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.783J.
S. D. Eppinger

2.74 Optimal Product Redesign

Prereq.: 2.007 or equivalent, access to PC or
Macintosh

G (Fall)

3-0-6

Reverse engineering products, demonstrated
with a consumer product case study
redesigned in class through homework assign-
ments. Lectures discuss: identifying objectives
a product must satisfy; determining what the
product has to satisfy the objectives; functional
modeling of the product; morphological
analysis; physical modeling for use in optimiza-
tion studies using readily available computer
tools; notions of performance and quality;
designed experiments; prototyping solutions
under real-world conditions.

K. Otto

2.744 Product Design

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-1-8

Project-centered subject addressing transfor-
mation of ideas into successful new products
which are properly matched to the user and
the market. Students are asked to take a more
complete view of a new product and to gain ex-
perience with designs judged on their aes-
thetics, ease of use, and sensitivities to the
realities of the marketplace. Lectures on
modern design process, design for quality, and
design for manufacturability. Guest lectures
and case studies from practitioners.

D. R. Wallace, W. C. Flowers

320 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 25 ---
Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2

2.75 Precision Machine Design
Prereq.: 2.72 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Intensive coverage of precision engineering

theory, heuristics, and applications pertaining
to the design of systems ranging from con-
sumer products to machine tools. Topics
covered include: economics, project manage-
ment, and design philosophy; principles of ac-
curacy, repeatability, and resolution; error
budgeting; sensors; sensor mounting; systems
design; bearings; actuators and transmissions.
Emphasis on developing creative designs
which are optimized by analytical techniques
applied via spreadsheets. Many real-world ex-
amples are given, and classwork and tests are
based on mini-design problems.

A. Slocum

Biomedical Engineering

(See also 2.277 and 2.907J.)

2.761J Principles of Medical Imaging

(Same subject as 22.56J, HST.561J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.56J.
D. Cory, D. Rowell

2.763J Hyperthermia: Biology, Technology,
and Cancer Therapy

(Same subject as HST.532J)

Cellular and biological effects of hyperthermia;

underlying mechanisms. Synergism with radia-
tion and chemical injury. Heat generation and
heat transfer in tissues and organs; bio-heat
transfer modeling. Effects on tissue blood per-
fusion and oxygen transport; techniques of
measurement. Ultrasonic and electromagnetic
techniques for noninvasive regional and local
hyperthermia. Tissue temperature measure-
ment techniques. Effects on tumor and normal
tissue in animals and man. Hyperthermia
therapy planning. Clinical results. Thermal
dosimetry. Research areas.

H. F. Bowman, Staff

2.781J Biomedical Instrumentation
Electronics

(Same subject as HST.570J, 16.458J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Summer)

6-6-6

See description under subject HST.570J.
D. Rowell, S. K. Burns

2.782J Design of Medical Devices and
Implants

(Same subject as HST.524J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject HST.524J.

|. Yannas, M. Spector

2.785J Mechanical Forces in Organ
Development and Remodeling

(Same subject as 3.97J, HST.523J)

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 2.005 or 5.60; 7.012 o
7.013

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mechanical forces play a decisive role during

development of tissues and organs, during
remodeling following injury as well as in nor-
mal function. Mechanical forces influence cell
function primarily through deformation of the
extracellular matrix to which cells are attached.
The unit cell process paradigm together with
topics in connective tissue mechanics form the
basis for discussions of several topics from cell
biology, physiology, and medicine.

|. V. Yannas, M. Spector

2.79J Biomaterials — Tissue Interactions

(Same subject as 3.96J, HST.522J)

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 2.005 or 5.60; 7.012 or
7.013

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of materials science and cell biology

underlying the design of medical implants and
artificial organs. Methods for biomaterials sur-
face characterization and analysis of protein
adsorption on biomaterials. Molecular and cel-
lular interactions with biomaterials are
analyzed in terms of unit cell processes, such
as matrix synthesis, degradation, and contrac-
tion. Mechanisms underlying tissue remodeling
following implantation in various organs.
Design of implants and prostheses based on
control of biomaterials-tissue interactions.
Comparative analysis of intact, biodegradable,
and bioreplaceable implants by reference to
case studies. Criteria for restoration of
physiological function for tissues and organs.
|. V. Yannas, M. Spector

2.791J Quantitative Physiology:
Cells and Tissues

(Subject meets with 6.021J, 2.794J, 6.521J,

HST.541u)

Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.002 or 6.071 or 10.301;
8.02, 18.03

U (Fall)

5-2-5

For juniors and seniors. Meets with graduate

subject 6.521J, but assignments differ. 4 En-
gineering Design Points. See description
under subject 6.021J.

T. F. Weiss, D. M. Freeman

2.792J Quantitative Physiology: Organ
Transport Systems

(Subject meets with 6.022J, 2.796J, 6.522J,
HST.542J)

Prereq.: 2.791J; 2.006 or 6.013

U (Spring)

4-2-6

See description under subject 6.022J.
R. G. Mark, R. D. Kamm

2.793J Quantitative Physiology: Sensory
and Motor Systems

(Same subject as 6.023J, 16.401J, HST.543J)
Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.003 or 16.060

U (Spring)

3-2-7

See description under subject 6.023J.
L. S. Frishkopf, L. Young, C. Wall Ili, N. Hogan

2.794J Quantitative Physiology: Cells and
Tissues

(Subject meets with 6.021J, 2.791J, 6.521J,
HST.541J)

Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.002 or 6.071 or 10.301;
8.02, 18.03

G (Fall)

5-2-5

See description under subject 6.021J.
T. F. Weiss, D. M. Freeman

2.795J Fields, Forces, and Flows:
Background for Physiology

(Same subject as 6.561J, HST.544J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.561J.
A. J. Grodzinsky

2.796J Quantitative Physiology: Organ
Transport Systems

(Subject meets with 6.022J, 2.792J, 6.522J,
HST.542J)

Prereq.: 2.006 or 6.013; 6.021J

G (Spring)

4-2-6

Meets with 6.022J. Requires the completion of
more advanced home problems and/or an ad-

ditional project. See description under subject

6.022J.

R. G. Mark, R. Kamm

a,

Descriptions of Subjects 321


--- 01.pdf Page 26 ---
School of Engineering

Manufacturing

2.800 Tribology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Geometric, chemical, and physical charac-

terization of surfaces. Various theories of fric-
tion and wear of metals, polymers, and
ceramics. Special emphasis on delamination
theory, discussion of erosion, boundary lubrica-
tion and solid-film lubrication. Rolling contact
problems. Tribological problems in magnetic
recording and electrical contacts. Monitoring
and diagnosis of friction and wear. Case
Studies.

N. P. Suh, N. Saka

2.810 Fundamentals of Manufacturing
Processes

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.006, 2.008, or equivalents

G (Fall)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to manufacturing processes includ-

ing machining, injection molding, casting, com-
posites, assembly, and others. Emphasis on
the physics and the stochastic nature of the
processes, and how these control the quality,
rate, cost, and flexibility. Engineering analysis
and probabilistic treatment include such topics
as shrinkage and positioning errors, heat trans-
fer, physical rate limits, information theory, and
design for manufacture. Group project requires
fabrication of a product using several proces-
ses, usually including CNC machining, injec-
tion molding, casting, and others. Discussion
of new process development and potential
competitive advantages.

T. G. Gutowski, J.-H. Chun

2.812 The Design and Control of
Manufacturing Systems
(New)

Prereq.: 2.810 or permission of instructor

G (Spring)
3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the history, development, and

design of manufacturing systems. Project em-
phasis on designing a lean production system.
Covers factory design, the design and forma-
tion of manufacturing cells (manned and
automated), machine and setup design for
manufacturing flexibility, and the use of infor-
mation to control manufacturing systems.
Relationships with area manufacturers have
been established so that actual manufacturing
system design problems are examined and
solved in conjunction with the term project.

D. Cochran

2.82 Introduction to Manufacturing System
Design
(New)

Prereq.: 2.008
U (Spring)
3-6-3 Institute LAB

Concentrates on the design of manufacturing

systems. Goal is to design a lean manufactur-
ing system. By designing an actual manufactur-
ing system, students understand the
engineering design principles necessary to
enable the implementation and advancement
of manufacturing system design. Design areas
include factory design, the formation of
manufacturing cells (manned and automated),
machine and setup design for manufacturing
flexibility, and the use of information to control
manufacturing systems. Elective unit distribu-
tion: Advanced disciplinary 6, design 3, lab 3.
D. Cochran

2.822 Design and Manufacture with
Composite Materials

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.006, 2.30, or equivalent

G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and practice of how structures are

designed and built out of composite materials.
Principles introduced through case studies and
laboratory demonstrations include: solid
mechanics, anisotropy, differential geometry,
consolidation and flow through porous media,
forming, automation, assembly, and
economics. Future developments in composite
materials, markets, and processes discussed.
T. G. Gutowski

2.830 Control of Manufacturing
Processes

Prereq.: 2.010 or 15.075 or equivalent

G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Process control in manufacturing processes.

Discrete system feedback control theory, em-
pirical/adaptive modeling, and basic process
physics understanding. A general framework
for modeling and control of manufacturing
processes is developed. Various existing
forms of process control are studied, including
off-line optimization, statistical process control,
and real-time machine and process control.
The control approach to process physics is ex-
amined in the context of specific manufactur-
ing processes.

D. E. Hardt

2.851J System Optimization and Analysis
for Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.066J, 3.83J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.066J.
S. C. Graves, J. P. Clark

2.852 Manufacturing Systems Analysis

Prereq.: 6.041, permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Models of manufacturing systems, including
transfer lines and flexible manufacturing sys-
tems. Calculation of performance measures, in-
cluding throughput, in-process inventory, and
meeting production commitments. Real-time
control of scheduling. Effects of machine
failure, set-ups, and other disruptions on sys-
tem performance.

S. B. Gershwin

2.870 Total Quality Development

Prereq.: Permission of instructor required for
undergraduates

G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Total development process that begins with
strategic needs and voice of customer and con-
cludes with new product in production. Topics
include House of Quality, Pugh Concept Selec-
tion, Extended and Enhanced QFD, robust-
ness optimization (Taguchi), on-line QC, and
holistic management. All topics are integrated
into world-class concurrent engineering, an in-
depth enhancement of basic TQM. Emphasis
is on recent improvements in industrial prac-
tice.

D. Clausing

2.882 Principles of Axiomatic Design

Prereq.: 2.001, 2.006, 2.30, 2.005
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to design and design processes
for products, processes, and systems; introduc-
tion to design axioms, corollaries, and
theorems; mathematical representation of
design; formulation of design matrix; analysis
of functional independence; graphical repre-
sentation of functional independence; measure
of information content; application to process
planning; case studies involving real industrial
problems; robust design; optimization of
designs. Design of Thinking Design Machine.
N. P. Suh

2.890J Proseminar in Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.792J, 3.80J, 10.792J,
16.985J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.792J.

Fall Term: D. B. Rosenfield
Spring Term: J. Carroll

322 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 27 ---
Department of Mechanical Engineering Course 2

2.891 Management for Engineers

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-0-4

Provides an overview of management issues

for graduate engineers. Topic is approached in
terms of career options as engineering prac-
titioner, manager, and entrepreneur.

topics include semantics, finance, TQM, start-
ing a company, and people management.
Through selected readings from texts and
cases, focuses on the development of in-
dividual skills and management tools. Re-
quires student participation and discussion,
term paper. Limited to 25 graduate students.
A. V. d’Arbeloff, T. G. Gutowski

Polymers and Fibers

2.9213 Deformation and Fracture of
Polymers

(Same subject as 3.951J)

Prereq.: 2.001 or 3.11

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Linear and nonlinear viscoelasticity below and

above Tg. Phenomenology of plastic deforma-
tion in crystalline, and glassy polymers,
molecular theories for yielding, post yield ex-
tensions for intermediate and large strains,
development of deformation textures,
anisotropic yield conditions. Fracture in
polymers, statistical damage accumulation.
Crazing as a precursor to fracture, kinetics of
nucleation of crazes, mechanics of craze ex-
tension, development and propagation of
cracks. Fatigue in polymers under both static
and cyclic loading.

|. V. Yannas

2.93J Engineers, Scientists, and Public -
Controversies

(Same subject as STS.012J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject STS.012J.

C. Weiner

Special Studies

2.942 Entrepreneurship

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)
4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

T. G. Gutowski

2.943 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni

2.95J Real-World Ethics

(Same subject as TPP.09J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-6 HASS

Prepares students to recognize ethical
problems that commonly arise in the
workplace, and to find, evaluate, use, and
strengthen institutional supports for acting on
ethical concerns. Lectures survey issues and
practices in corporate and research contexts.
In discussion sections, students develop ethics
scenarios on issues of their choosing and ex-
plore them with representatives of corpora-
tions, universities, etc., at which students
might work or study. Open to juniors and
seniors, Others by permission.

C. Whitbeck, L. Bucciarelli

2.951 Engineering Internship

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

2.952 Advanced Engineering Internship

Prereq.: 2.951

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Provides academic credit for undergraduate

and graduate work assignments for Mechani-
cal Engineering students participating in the
Engineering Internship Program. Under-
graduate participation is approximately six
months over two summers of practical work in
manufacturing, engineering, research and
development at an industrial plant. Graduate
participation by students admitted to the
Department's graduate program consists of ap-
proximately seven months at industrial plant.
Credit is awarded after evaluation and ap-
proval of the actual work performed.

P. Griffith

2.953J Research Ethics

(Same subject as 16.954J, TPP.41J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-3

Examines the norms that govern research, the
new policies for coping with changing condi-
tions of research. Prepares students to ad-
dress problems of research ethics and identify,
evaluate, use, and strengthen institutional sup-
ports for acting on such ethical concerns. The
core responsibilities for integrity of research
results and for proper crediting of sources and
collaborators are explored, together with the
moral problems which, if poorly handled, are li-
able to create pressures to “cut corners.” This
is a half-term subject, taught in the first half of
the term.

C. Whitbeck

2.954J Ethical Problems in Advanced
Engineering and Science

(Same subject as TPP.42J)

Prereq.: 2.953J, 16.954, TPP 41J, permission
of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-3

Examines moral problems in doctoral and post-
doctoral engineering and science, and the
scope and limits of the individual's or
professor's opportunities and responsibility to
address such problems. Topics such as
responsibility for human subjects, for research
animals, for safety, for “bugs,” for public under-
standing of technology, for environmental ef-
fects, and issues such as rights of privacy (the
new genetics, data banks), technology trans-
fer, and academic-industrial collaboration. This
is a half-term subject, taught in the second half
of the term.

C. Whitbeck, N. Kiang

2.96 Management in Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Introduction of engineering management in
variety of settings: 1) role of engineering and
its relationship to other functions, 2)
managerial tools and concepts used in en-
gineering organizations, 3) practice in handling
short- and long-term problems, 4) career
strategy and development. Topics: financial
principles, management of innovation, en-
gineering project planning and control, human
factors, career planning, patents, and technical
strategy. Case method of instruction em-
phasizes participation in class discussion.
Juniors, seniors, or graduate students. Elective
unit distribution: Advanced disciplinary, 6;
Design, 6. Engineering School-Wide Elective
subject.

J.-H, Chun

Descriptions of Subjects 323


--- 01.pdf Page 28 ---
School of Engineering

OO SS SS Sv

2.97, 2.971 Independent Activities
Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

Units a

Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates desiring to carry on inde-

pendent or group studies during the January
Independent Activities Period. Each student
will carry on a program of his or her own choos-
ing, either as an independent worker, or as a
member of a team or class. Special lectures,
seminars, and laboratory projects arranged
when appropriate. Programs arranged on an
individual basis in consultation with the instruc-
tor. Credit arranged with D. Rowell. 2.971 is
graded P/D/F.

Graduate Seminars in
Mechanical Engineering

Check with our Department graduate office
prior to the beginning of each term for
other proposed listings.

2.981 Low-Temperature Refrigeration

Prereq.: 2.005

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The ic processes for producing low-
temperature refrigeration. Problems of heat ex-
changers, insulation, and rectification.
Applications of low-level refrigeration to li-
quefaction of helium and to application of su-
perconductors. Laboratory projects on related
topics according to individual interests.

J. L. Smith, Jr.

2.982 Microscale Heat Transfer

Prereq.: 2.51 or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Sub-micron structures are the hallmark of
electronic and biological systems. Microscale
transport phenomena differ from those in the
macroscopic realm if a geometric dimension,
@.g., film thickness, becomes of the order of a
phenomenological length-scale, e.g., radiation
wavelength. This seminar introduces the break-
down limits of continuum analyses for radia-
tion, conduction, convection, and phase
change heat transfer. Participants present
technical case studies in areas of their interest,
such as electronic packaging or biological tis-
sues.

E. Cravalho

324 Chapter Vill

2.990-2.991 Advanced Topics in Fluid and
Thermal Sciences

Prereq.: 2.25, 2.451, 2.55

G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced subjects in transport phenomena
taught for six weeks. Spring 1997: Microscale
Laser Diagnostics and Processing. Principles
of laser-material interactions: electronic strucs-
tures of materials and light absorption/emis-
sion by gas molecules, small particles, and
solids. Microscale energy transfer in laser diag-
nostics and processing. Optical detection and
imaging. Applications of laser spectroscopy in
combustion, fluid flow, heat transfer, and bio-
engineering. Laser microfabrication. Extremes
of laser technology.

M. Johnson, T. Q. Qiu

2.993-2.995 Special Topics in Mechanical
Engineering

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates desiring to carry on sub-

stantial projects of own choice, under faculty
supervision, in mechanical engineering. Work
may be of experimental, theoretical, or design
nature. Projects may be arranged individually
in most fields of department interest, i.e., in
mechanics and materials, thermal and fluid
sciences, systems and design, and biomedical
engineering.

Coordinator: D. Rowell.

2.996—2.998 Advanced Topics in
Mechanical Engineering

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Assigned reading and special problems or re-

search in special areas, either theoretical or ex-
perimental, or design. Arranged on individual
basis with instructor in the following areas:
mechanics and materials, thermal and fluid
sciences, systems and design, and biomedical
engineering. Coordinator: A. A. Sonin.

2.999 Engineer's Degree Thesis Proposal
Preparation

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For students who must do additional work to

convert an S.M. Thesis to an M.E. Thesis, or
for students who do an M.E. Thesis after
having received an S.M. degree.

A. A. Sonin

2.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member.

Consult Department Headquarters.

2.THU Undergraduate Independent Study
or Thesis

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual self-motivated study, research, or
design project under faculty supervision.
Departmental program requirement: Minimum
of 6 units.

D. Rowell



--- 01.pdf Page 29 ---
Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3

Course 3 Materials Science and
Engineering
For degree requirements, see listing
in Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.
3.UR Undergraduate Research 3.03 Chemical Metallurgy 3.05 Computer Models of Physical and
Prereq.: — Prereq.: 3.185 Engineering Systems
U (Fall, Spring, Summer) U (Spring) Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00
Units arranged [P/D/F] 3-0-9 U (Spring)
Can be repeated for credit Thermodynamics and kinetic principles along a, AMSG 2 = SR ie
3.URG Undergraduate Research with aspects of process control andeconomics — Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
involved in extraction and processing of me- Description given at end of this chapter in
Prereq.: — S tals. Unit operations and processes. Generaliz- | SWE section on page 562.
U (Fall, Spring, Summer) ing operations in terms of gas-liquid, F. Pefia-Mora
Unite aa cates solid-solid, gas-solid, liquid-liquid, and gas-
vier ———————_Stlid-liquid reactions. Electrochemical proces- 3,062 Polymer Chemistry
Extended participation in work of a research ses. Designing energy-efficient and P a001 05.11
group. Independent study of literature, direct in- | environmentally sound processes. Uren /U97 OF 9.
volvement in group’s research (commensurate _—U.. B.. Pal Y. He : )

with student skills), and project work under an
individual faculty member. See UROP coor-
dinator for registration procedures.

D. K. Roylance

3.ThU Undergraduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of undergraduate research, leading

to the writing of an S.B. thesis; to be arranged
by the student and an appropriate MIT faculty
member.

Consult D. K. Roylance.

3.00 Thermodynamics of Materials
Prereq.: 18.02

U (Fall)

4-0-8 REST

Essential features of first, second, and third

laws of thermodynamics and their application
to materials. Statistical interpretation of

phase diagrams, phase rule, and ther-
modynamics of solutions. Thermochemistry of
—— and heterogeneous reactions.

. Ceder

3.01 Physical Chemistry of Materials
Prereq.: 3.00 or 5.60 or 2.40 or 10.213
U (Spring)

4-0-8

Reactions involving pure condensed
and gaseous phase, behavior of solutions, free

3.035, 3.036, 3.037 Special Problems in
Materials Science and Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

3.038, 3.039, 3.04 Special Problems in
Materials Science and Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates desiring to carry on
projects of their own choosing, which may be
experimental, theoretical, or of a design na-
ture. Also for undergraduate studies arranged

by students or staff, which may consist of semi-

nars, assigned reading, or laboratory projects.
See UROP Coordinator for registration proce-
dures,

D. K. Roylance

3.041 Undergraduate Research Seminar

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
0-3-0

Basic skills for conducting research in
materials science and engineering. Includes
library resources, how to plan experiments,
laboratory safety, data analysis, oral presenta-
tions and technical writing of proposals and
reports. Intended for the sophomore year,
open to freshmen.

T. W. Eagar, D. K. Roylance

Preparation of polymeric materials and their
characterization. Topics: fundamentals of
chain and step growth polymerization,
chemistry of organic radicals and ions, syn-
thesis-structure-property relationships, and
use of modern techniques for determination of
polymer composition, molecular weight, and
microstructure.

M. F. Rubner

3.063 Polymer Physics

Prereq.: 3.062, 3.00
U (Spring)
4-0-8

Principles underlying the physics and physical
chemistry of polymers in solution and in the
solid state. Topics include conformation and
molecular dimensions of polymer chains; ther-
modynamics of polymer solutions; an examina-
tion of the glassy, crystalline, and rubbery
elastic states of polymers; kinetics and ther-
modynamics of crystallization; liquid crystal-
linity in polymers; thermodynamics of rubber
elasticity. The electrical, optical, transport, and
mechanical properties of polymers are
analyzed with respect to the above topics.

E. L. Thomas

3.064 Polymer Engineering

Prereq.: 3.11, 3.185
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Overview of engineering analysis and design
techniques for synthetic polymers. Treatment
of materials selection, mechanical charac-
terization, and processing in design of load-
bearing and environment-compatible
structures.

F. J. McGarry, D. K. Roylance

Descriptions of Subjects 325


--- 01.pdf Page 30 ---
School of Engineering

—_————. Ss FF 595959599999

3.069 Ceramics Processing

Prereq.: 3.185
U (Spring)
3-0-9

In-depth study of the unit operations in
processing technical ceramics and the effect of
these operations on the properties of the
sintered material. Topics include powder
production and conditioning, drying, forming,
sintering, and microstructure development.
Relevant aspects of transport phenomena, col-
loid science, and chemistry are discussed, as
well as contemporary issues in ceramic com-
posite processing. Case studies involving both
electronic and structural ceramics are
reviewed.

M. J. Cima

3.07 Introduction to Ceramics

Prereq.: 3.01, 3.13
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Discusses structure-property relationships in

ceramic materials. Includes hierarchy of struc-
tures from the atomic to microstructural levels.
Defects, atom mobility, solid-state
electrochemical processes, phase equilibria,
and phase transformations are discussed in
the context of controlling properties for struc-
tural and electronic applications of ceramics.
Numerous examples from current technology.
Y.-M. Chiang

3.070J Materials for Nuclear Applications

(Subject meets with 22.70J, 3.711J, 22.070J)
Prereq.: 3.091

U (Spring)

3-0-9

See description under subject 22.70J.
K. C. Russell

3.08J Industrial Competition in the US and
Asia

(Same subject as 21H.541J, TPP.03J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

2-0-7 HASS

Examines causes of economic efficiency and

international competitiveness in the US and
Asia, considering relative importance of tech-
nological, economical, social, and historical fac-
tors. Countries discussed include modern
China (mainland, Taiwan, and Hong Kong),
South Korea, and Japan. Topics include costs
of production, product quality, organizational
structures, labor relations, and the educational
system. Case studies of selected industries
such as automotive, steel, electronics, com-
puters, and biotechnology.

J. P. Clark, P. C. Perdue

3.081 Materials Structure Laboratory

Prereq.: 3.13 or permission of instructor

U (Fall, Spring)
1-6-5 Institute LAB

Structure, structural transitions, and their in-

fluence on materials properties are examined
by classical characterization methods (optical
and electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, UV
and IR spectroscopy, TGA, DSC) and by more
recently developed tools (AFM, Auger
spectroscopy, molecular simulation). Investiga-
tions address four central themes: electronic
and chemical structure, order and disorder, sur-
faces and interfaces, nucleation and growth.
Unknown materials determination and
materials design for the environment.

Fall Term: A. M. Mayes

Spring Term: L. W. Hobbs

3.082 Materials Processing Laboratory

Prereq.: 3.01, 3.081, 3.13
U (Fall, Spring)
1-6-5

A unified laboratory teaching students how to

tailor the properties and performance of a
material by modifications in its composition
and microstructure through synthesis and
processing. Students process materials from
different classes (metals, ceramics, polymers,
and electronic materials). Design is an integral
part of this subject, which consists of two six-
week project modules. Examples include
solidification processing, powder processing,
and thin-film processing of materials for mag-
netic, electronic, optical, and structural applica-
tions.

Y.-M. Chiang, D. C. Dunand, J. S. Haggerty,
M. F. Rubner, C. E. Scott

3.091 Introduction to Solid-State Chemistry

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 CHEMISTRY

Introduction to the basic principles of chemistry
and their application to the solid state.
Development of relationships between
electronic structure of elements, chemical
bonding, and crystal structure. Charac-
terization of atomic and molecular arrange-
ments in crystalline and amorphous solids.
Chemical kinetics. Phase diagrams. Examples
from contemporary industrial pratice (including
the environmental impacts of processes and
products) and from emerging technologies,
@.g., biomaterials.

Fall Term: D. R. Sadoway

Spring Term: A. M. Latanision

3.092 Perspectives in Materials Science

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Surveys, in some depth, materials science and
its applications at levels suitable for those with
no prior experience in the field. Lectures by
MIT staff and guests form a series of in-
tegrated seminars on important aspects of the
field.

A. F. Witt

3.093 Hotter, Faster, Stronger, Cheaper:
Materials at the Frontiers of Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (IAP)
1-0-2 [P/D/F]

Illustrates the physical and economic limits to
performance of engineering systems imposed
by properties and costs of currently available
materials in a series of case-study lectures by
MIT staff and guests. Explores how and why
materials behave as they do, as well as
prospects and opportunities for the develop-
ment of new materials. Suitable for those with
no prior experience in materials science.

J. P. Clark

3.10 Chemical Physics of Materials

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 8.02, 18.03
U (Spring)
4-0-8 REST

Introduction to the physics of the chemical
bond in molecules and solids; electrons and
energy bands in solids; electrical, optical, mag-
netic, and thermal properties.

E. A. Fitzgerald, J. D. Livingston

3.11 Mechanics of Materials

Prereq.: 3.01, 3.13

U (Spring)

4-0-8

Overview of mechanical properties of
ceramics, metals, and polymers, emphasizing
the role of processing and microstructure in
controlling these properties. Introduction to
continuum concepts of stress and strain, and
design of engineering structures from a
materials point of view.

S. Suresh, D. K. Roylance

3.13 Structure of Materials

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
4-0-8 REST

Provides fundamental basis for understanding
structure and its relationship to physical proper-
ties. Symmetry theory for the description of the
atomic and molecular arrangements in crys-
tals. Principles of space groups and use of /n-
ternational Tables for Crystallography for
specifying crystal structure. Point, line, and
planar imperfections in ordered media. Quan-
titative description of noncrystalline materials.
Liquid crystals. Fractals. Structural hierarchies.
Influence of processing on microstructure;
structure-property relations.

S. M. Allen, E. L. Thomas

3.14 Physical Metallurgy

Prereq.: 3.01; 3.11; 3.13
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Treats phase transformation and strengthen-
ing mechanisms in metals and alloys. Also
provides an introduction to processing, micro-
structures, and properties of alloy systems of
major engineering significance.

A. Mortensen

326 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 31 ---
Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3

3.15 Electrical, Optical, and Magnetic
Materials and Devices

Prereq.: 3.10
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Explores the relationships which exist between

the performance of electrical, optical, and mag-
netic devices and the microstructural charac-
teristics of the materials from which they are
constructed. Features a device-motivated ap-
proach which places strong emphasis on
emerging technologies. Device applications of
physical phenomena are considered, including
electrical conductivity and doping, photodetec-
tion, photoluminescence and electrolumines-
cence, light amplification, nonlinear optics and
optical switching, ferroelectricity, and ferromag-
netism.

K. D. Kolenbrander

3.155J Microelectronics Processing
Technology

(Same subject as 6.152J, 10.480J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

U (Fall, Spring)

3-4-5

See description under subject 6.152J.
L. C. Kimerling, C. V. Thompson, H. H. Sawin,
M. A. Schmidt, C. G. Sodini, K. K. Gleason

3.172 Inventions and Patents

Prereq.: 14.02
U (Fall)

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
R. H. Rines

3.185 Transport Phenomena in Materials
Engineering

Prereq.: 3.01, 18.03
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Definition of viscosity, simple overall mechani-

cal energy balances, elements of laminar flow
and turbulent flow. Thermal conductivity,

steady and unsteady conduction problems,
forced and natural convection, heat transfer
coefficient, and radiative heat transfer. Defini-
tion of binary diffusivity, convection mass trans-
fer, and mass transfer coefficient. Illustrative
examples given throughout, chosen from the
materials processing field.

M. C. Flemings

3.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the

writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member.

Consult L. W. Hobbs in Room 8-303.

3.20 Thermodynamics of Materials

Prereq.: 3.00, 3.01, or permission of instructor

G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Offers advanced treatment of thermodynamic

properties of inorganic materials, including in-
troductory statistical thermodynamics and sur-
_ thermodynamics. Applies laws of

to chemical behavior of ele-
i compounds, and solutions. Discusses
heterogeneous equilibria, chemical reactions,
and thermodynamics of interfaces and struc-
tural defects.
K. C. Russell

3.21 Kinetic Processes in Materials

Prereq.: 3.00, 3.01, 3.185, or permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents unified treatment of kinetics from

phenomenological and atomistic viewpoints.
Covers diffusion in metals and non-metals,
chemical kinetics, and kinetics of phase trans-
formations, including nucleation, growth, coar-
sening, and spinodal decomposition. Also
includes non-catalytic gas-solid reactions and
oxidation of metals and alloys.

S.M Allen, R. W. Balluffi

3.271 Structure of Materials

Prereq.: 18.03, 3.10
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantitative description of atomic arrange-

ments in selected metals, oxides, and silicates
important in materials science. Interprets struc-
tures in terms of coordination polyhedra and
packing. Relationships between structures:

polymorphism, polytypism, and derivative struc-

tures. Describes diffraction using Fourier trans-
forms and series. Determines structure
through diffraction effects: the phase problem,
Patterson function, and direct methods for
phase determination.

B. J. Wuensch

3.29 Special Problems in Materials
Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.291 Special Problems in Materials
Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced work in the field for qualified stu-

dents. Lectures, conferences, assigned read-
ings, or supervised laboratory work.
R. M. Rose

3.30 Electron Microscopy: Image
Interpretation

Prereq.: 3.081, 3.13

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Derives relationship between detail in transmis-
sion electron microscopy images and internal
structure of an object to the atomic level.
Fourier theory of diffraction. Lens action, aber-
rations, and transfer functions. Elastic and in-
elastic interaction of electrons with atoms.
Kinematical and dynamical theories of electron
diffraction. Phase object approximations and
high-resolution imaging methods. Imaging of
defects with displacement and replacement
fields. Laboratory sessions. Alternate years.

L. W. Hobbs

3.31 Phase Transformations

Prereq.: 3.20, 3.21
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced treatment of phase transformations
in solids. Homogeneous and heterogeneous
nucleation. Theories of thermally activated
growth processes and morphological stability.
Transformation by spinodal decomposition and
continuous ordering. Transformation
mechanisms in systems with multicritical
points. Eutectoidal transformations and cellular
precipitation. Crystallographic theory and
mechanisms of martensitic transformations.

R. M. Rose

3.320 Atomistic Computer Modeling of
Materials

Prereq.: 3.20, 3.13, or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Atomistic computer modeling as a tool to solve
problems in materials science and engineer-
ing. Deterministic and stochastic methods.
Monte Carlo and molecular dynamics. Energy
models (classical and quantum-mechanical).
Free energy computation. Phase transforma-
tions. Metastability. Order-disorder transforma-
tions. Defect properties. Transport properties.
Emphasis on solving relevant problems in a
variety of materials classes.

G. Ceder

3.33 Defects in Crystals

Prereq.: 3.13, 3.14
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Unified treatment of point, line, and planar
defects in crystals. Point defects include vacan-
cies, self-interstitials, and solute atoms. Line
defects include dislocations. Planar defects in-
clude stacking faults, small- and large-angle
grain boundaries, and interphase boundaries.
Discusses geometrical structure and physical
properties such as stress fields, energies, and
mobilities. Treats interactions between defects
including point defect clustering, point defect-
dislocation pinning, dislocation climb, and

grain boundaries as point defect sources/sinks.
R. W. Balluffi

Descriptions of Subjects 327


--- 01.pdf Page 32 ---
School of Engineering

3.34 High-Temperature Materials
Prereq.: 3.11 or 3.14 or equivalent
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers the relationship between deformation

mechanisms and microstructure for materials
used at elevated temperature. Mechanisms:
diffusional creep, dislocation creep, grain-
boundary sliding and superplasticity, fatigue,
fracture, environmental effects. Microstructure:
metals (iron-, cobalt-, nickel-, refractory- and in-
termetallic alloys), ceramics, composites
(metal-, ceramic- and carbon-matrix, coated
materials).

D. C. Dunand

3.35 Fracture and Fatigue

Prereq.: 2.30 or 3.11 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Linear elastic and elastic plastic fracture

mechanics. Experimental methods. Microstruc-
tural effects on fracture in metals, ceramics,
polymers, electronic materials, and com-
posites. Toughening mechanisms. Crack
growth resistance and creep fracture. Interface
fracture mechanics. Fatigue damage and dis-
location substructures in single crystals. Stress-
and strain-life approach to fatigue. Fatigue
crack growth models and mechanisms. Vari-
able amplitude fatigue. Corrosion fatigue.
Case studies. Co-taught with Professor A. G.
Evans, Harvard University.

S. Suresh

3.36J Welding Engineering

(Same subject as 13.17J)
Prereq.: 13.15

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.17J.
K. Masubuchi

3.37 Welding and Joining Processes

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Discusses a wide variety of processes and
materials from the viewpoint of their fundamen-
tal physical and chemical properties. Specific
topics: cold welding, adhesive bonding, dif-
fusion bonding, soldering, brazing, flames,
arcs, high-energy density heat sources,
solidification, cracking resistance, shielding
methods, and electric contacts. Emphasis on
underlying science of a given process rather
than a detailed description of the technique or
equipment.

T. W. Eagar

3.39 Mechanical Properties of Materials
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 2.30; 3.11 or 22.71J
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews elasticity theory. Elements of con-

tinuum plasticity and dislocation plasticity.
Strengthening mechanisms in metals. Basics
of viscoelasticity and creep. Applications of
principles in linear elastic fracture mechanics
to brittle fracture and to fatigue crack propaga-
tion. Micromechanisms of static and cyclic frac-
ture. Discusses case studies and reviews
current research in the mechanical behavior of
structural and device materials with examples
in each class of materials; metals, ceramics,
polymers, thin films, and composites.

D. C. Dunand, S. Suresh

3.40J Physical Metallurgy

(Same subject as 22.71J)
Prereq.: 3.14 or 3.711J

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Discusses structure-property relationships in

metallic alloys selected to illustrate some basic
concepts of physical metallurgy and alloy
design. Considers mostly mechanical proper-
ties. Also considers structural features: struc-
tural stability, grain size, interstitial and
substitutional solutes, precipitates, second-
phase particles, eutectics and eutectoids, and
composites.

R. W. Balluffi

3.41 Physics and Chemistry of Materials

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantum physics and chemistry and statistics

of electrons, atoms, molecules, and solids.
Electron structure of crystalline and amor-
phous materials, defects, surfaces, and inter-
faces. Transport in metals, semiconductors,
and insulators — ideal and defective. Introduc-
tion to junction theory. Optical and dielectric
phenomena — absorption, emission, refrac-
tion. Magnetic phenomena — dia-, para-, and
ferro-magnetism. Superconductivity. Implica-
tions for properties of interest.

E. A. Fitzgerald

3.42 Electronic Materials Design

Prereq.: 3.41
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Extensive and intensive examination of struc-

ture (crystalline, electronic, defect, and
microstructure)-processing-property correla-
tions for a wide range of materials including
metals, semiconductors, dielectrics, optical,
magnetic, and superconducting materials. Em-
phasis on materials design in relation to fun-
damental device characteristics.

K. D. Kolenbrander, H. L. Tuller

3.43 Electronic Materials and Devices

Prereq.: 3.20, 3.42
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Detailed examination of the principal electrical,
optical, and magnetic devices, e.g., p-n,
Schottky, MOS and heterojunctions, quantum
wells, lasers, wave guides, detectors, solar
cells, magnetic memory devices, etc. Focus on
materials selection, optimization and integra-
tion. Discussion of new materials needs and al-
ternative processing routes.

H. L. Tuller

3.44 Electronic Materials Processing

Prereq.: 3.20, 3.21
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Processing of electronic materials for device
and circuit applications. Detailed discussion of
techniques and theory for growth of device-
quality crystals. Processes for integrated cir-
cuit fabrication including oxidation, junction
formation, and metallization. Emphasis on
relationships among processing, structure, and
properties. Examples taken from materials
processing for applications in VLSI, op-
toelectronics, and multi-layer integration.

C. V. Thompson

3.45 Magnetic Materials

Prereq.: 3.41

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Magnetization phenomena, origin of mag-
netism in a material, magnetic domains and
domain walls, magnetic anisotropy, reversible
and irreversible magnetization processes. Spe-
cial topics: ferromagnetism of thin films and
fine particles, magnetic recording, magnetic cir-
cuits, amorphous magnetic materials. Alter-
nate years.

R. C. O'Handley

3.46 Optical and Optoelectronic
Materials

Prereq.: 3.42 or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Optical and optoelectronic properties of semi-
conductors, ceramics, and polymers.
Electronic structure, refractive index,
electroluminescence, Kerr and Faraday ef-
fects, and laser phenomena. Materials design
and processing for lasers, waveguides,
modulators, switches, and optoelectronic in-
tegrated circuits. Alternate years.

L. C. Kimerling

328 Chapter Vill


--- 01.pdf Page 33 ---
Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3

3.471 Advanced Topics on the Physics and
Chemistry of Materials

Prereq.: 3.41 or equivalent or permission of in-

structor
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics on the physics and chemistry of

materials not covered in the core subject of
3.41 including: molecular and crystal symmetry
group theory; ligand-field theory; applications
of quantum chemistry to the electronic struc-
tures of magnetic materials, high-Tc supercon-
ductors and organic electronic materials;
surface physics and chemistry; chemisorption
and catalysis. Topics tailored to students’ re-
search interests.

K. H. Johnson

3.48 Statistical Physics of Materials

Prereq.: 3.20

G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews basic classical and quantum statisti-

cal mechanics. Introduces Boltzmann transport
theory. Discusses Ising and Heisenberg

soluble models with application to order-disor-
der in alloys and magnetic materials; structural
phase transformations by Landau, renormaliza-
tion-group and Jahn-Teller theories, with ap-
plication to defect statistics, melting, and
polymer statistics; and electronic phase trans-
formations in ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic,
ferroelectric, and superconducting materials.
Alternate years.

K. H. Johnson

3.49 Special Problems in Electronic
Materials

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.491 Special Problems in Electronic
Materials

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced work for qualified students. Lec-

tures, conferences, assigned readings, or su-
pervised laboratory work.
H. L. Tuller

3.50 High-Temperature Physical Chemistry
of Materials

Prereq.: 3.01
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application of physicochemical principles to

study the nature of solids, liquids, and gases
and heterogeneous reactions between these
phases at elevated temperatures. Transport in
multi-component solids and liquids. Systems of
interest include liquid metals, semiconductors,
and other multicomponent solid and liquid
oxides.

U. B. Pal

3.51 Materials and the Environment
Prereq.: 3.205 or equivalent

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Industrial ecology of materials, i.e., how they

are extracted, refined, and recycled. Considers
the environmental impacts of the associated
materials processing operations, pollution con-
trol and waste treatment efforts, and recycling
options. Provides an intellectual platform for
green design. Energy audits, environmental
audits, and cost assessments.

D. R. Sadoway

3.52J Materials Processing

(Same subject as 10.581J)
Prereq.: 3.01, 3.185, or equivalents
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of thermal, powder, and vapor

processing; solidification, sintering, deforma-
tion processing, and composite materials
processing. Particular attention paid to struc-
tural evolution during processing, and resulting
material properties and performance.

A. Mortensen, K. F. Jensen, M. C. Flemings

3.53 Electrochemical Processing of
Materials

Prereq.: 3.185

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of electrochemistry: ther-
modynamics and kinetics of electrode proces-
ses, thermodynamic and transport properties
of aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes.
Electrolytic processing: electrowinning,
electrorefining, electroplating, electrosynthesis,
electrosiag remelting.

D. R. Sadoway

3.54J Corrosion: The Environmental
Degradation of Materials

(Same subject as 22.72J)
Prereq.: 3.00

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Applies thermodynamics and kinetics of
electrode reactions to aqueous corrosion of
metals and alloys. Forms of corrosion and cor-
rosion testing. Methods of corrosion control in-
cluding alloy selection, water chemistry, design
rules, anodic and cathodic protection, and coat-
ings. Extension to environmental degradation
of ceramics and polymers. Discusses
materials degradation problems in marine en-
vironments, oil and gas production, energy
conversion and generation systems.

R. G. Ballinger

3.541 Oxidation and Corrosion of Materials
at Elevated Temperatures

Prereq.: 3.20, 3.21

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application of fundamental principles of ther-
modynamics and kinetics to determination of
the mechanisms of the oxidation and corrosion
of materials at elevated temperatures.
Relationship of oxidation theory to design of al-
loys, and of coating materials for protection
against oxidation. Discussions of high-tempera-
ture oxidation and corrosion problems that
occur in systems for the conversion and utiliza-
tion of energy, and in petrochemical and metal-
lurgical industries. Alternate years.

L. W. Hobbs

3.55 Macroscopic Transport in Materials
Processing

Prereq.: 18.03
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of mathematical and physical model-
ing of primary metals processing, welding,
rapid solidification, and the processing of
electronic materials. The transport equations
as building blocks of mathematical models.
Similarity criteria in building of physical

models. Synthesis of an optimal modeling ap-
proach, involving mathematical models, physi-
cal models, and pilot plants.

C. E. Scott

3.56 Engineering Systems Analysis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

R. de Neutville, F. Field

3.560J Industrial Ecology

(Same subject as TPP.123J, 1.814J)
Prereq.: TPP.11 or 3.56

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject TPP.123J.
J. Clark, F. Field, R. de Neufville

3.563J Strategic Analysis for
Environmental Policy Planning, Design,
and Implementation

(Same subject as 1.141J, 6.688J, 11.385J,
22.822J, TPP.121J)

Prereq.: 1.146 or 2.192 or 3.56 or 13.62 or
16.861 or TPP.21 or 11.200 or 11.205

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.141J.

D. H. Marks, R. de Neutville, J. Clark,

R. Gakenheimer, M. W. Golay, D. Sadoway,
R. D. Tabors

Descriptions of Subjects 329


--- 01.pdf Page 34 ---
School of Engineering

3.566 Entrepreneurship
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

T. G. Gutowski

3.577 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni

3.595 Special Problems in Materials
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.596 Special Problems in Materials
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced work in the field for qualified stu-

dents. Lectures, conferences, assigned read-
ings, or supervised laboratory work.
R. M. Latanision

3.60 Symmetry, Structure, and Tensor
Properties of Materials

Prereq.: 3.07
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Derivation of symmetry theory; lattices, point

groups, space groups and their properties.
Use of symmetry in tensor representation of
crystal properties, including anisotropy, repre-
sentation surfaces, as well as applications to
piezo-electricity and elasticity. Quantative
description of atomic arrangements in selected
metals, oxides, and silicates important in
materials science. Interprets structure in terms
of coordination polyhedra and packing, and ex-
amines relations between structures: polymor-
phism, polytypism, and derivative structure.

B. J. Wuensch

3.62 Defect Thermodynamics and Solid
State Electrochemistry

Prereq.: 3.20
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The defect solid state is analyzed after a short

review of the perfect solid state. Equilibrium
and nonequilibrium thermodynamics of point
defects are applied to bulk and interfacial
problems, conduction and diffusion, solid-state
reactions, and heterogeneous catalysis.
Materials examples include fast ion conductors
and high temperature superconductors. Spe-
cial attention is paid to experimental
electrochemical methods and important
electrochemical applications (batteries, fuel
cells, photoelectrochemical elements, and sen-
sors). Half-term subject taught second half of
term.

J. Maier

3.63 Ceramic Processes
Prereq.: 3.07, 3.20

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents quantitative treatment of unit opera-

tions in powder processing-powder prepara-
tion, fabrication, and firing. Discusses glass
processing-homogenization during melting:
relationship to mixing theory-glass forming.
Also covers growth of crystals, ther-
modynamics, transport processes, and kinetics
in relation to structures developed.

M. J. Cima

3.64 Special Problems in Ceramics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.641 Special Problems in Ceramics
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Explores advanced work in this field. Lectures,

conferences, assigned readings, and
laboratory work.
B. J. Wuensch

3.691-3.699 Teaching Materials Science
and Engineering

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching

under the supervision of a faculty member. Stu-
dents selected by interview. (Enrollment

limited by availability of suitable teaching as-
signments.)

K. C. Russell

3.70 Special Problems in Metallurgy

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.701 Special Problems in Metallurgy

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Minor investigation in one of the special
branches of metallurgy. (Open only to students
properly qualified in the special field.)

K. C. Russell

3.711J Materials for Nuclear
Applications

(Subject meets with 22.70J, 3.070J, 22.070/)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.70J.
K. C. Russell

3.80J Proseminar in Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.792J, 2.890J, 10.792J,
16.985J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.792J.
D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll

3.81J Engineering Probability and
Statistics

(Same subject as 6.430J, 15.064J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.430J.
A. W. Drake

3.83J System Optimization and Analysis for
Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.066J, 2.851J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.066J.
S. C. Graves, J. P. Clark

3.891 Structure and Properties of Materials

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03
G (Summer)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Structure-properties relationships in materials.
Electrons in atoms and molecules, metallic,
covalent, and ionic bonding and its relationship
to structure and properties of crystalline and
non-crystalline solids, structure and its deter-
mination in crystalline and non-crystalline
solids, the defect solid state: point, line, areal,
and volume defects. Mechanical electronic,
magnetic, and phototonic properties, their
measurement, and their relationship to struc-
ture.

K. C. Russell

330 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 1 ---
School of Engineering

3.566 Entrepreneurship
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

T. G. Gutowski

3.577 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni

3.595 Special Problems in Materials
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.596 Special Problems in Materials
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced work in the field for qualified stu-

dents. Lectures, conferences, assigned read-
ings, or supervised laboratory work.
R. M. Latanision

3.60 Symmetry, Structure, and Tensor
Properties of Materials

Prereq.: 3.07
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Derivation of symmetry theory; lattices, point

groups, space groups and their properties.
Use of symmetry in tensor representation of
crystal properties, including anisotropy, repre-
sentation surfaces, as well as applications to
piezo-electricity and elasticity. Quantative
description of atomic arrangements in selected
metals, oxides, and silicates important in
materials science. Interprets structure in terms
of coordination polyhedra and packing, and ex-
amines relations between structures: polymor-
phism, polytypism, and derivative structure.

B. J. Wuensch

3.62 Defect Thermodynamics and Solid
State Electrochemistry

Prereq.: 3.20
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The defect solid state is analyzed after a short

review of the perfect solid state. Equilibrium
and nonequilibrium thermodynamics of point
defects are applied to bulk and interfacial
problems, conduction and diffusion, solid-state
reactions, and heterogeneous catalysis.
Materials examples include fast ion conductors
and high temperature superconductors. Spe-
cial attention is paid to experimental
electrochemical methods and important
electrochemical applications (batteries, fuel
cells, photoelectrochemical elements, and sen-
sors). Half-term subject taught second half of
term.

J. Maier

3.63 Ceramic Processes
Prereq.: 3.07, 3.20

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents quantitative treatment of unit opera-

tions in powder processing-powder prepara-
tion, fabrication, and firing. Discusses glass
processing-homogenization during melting:
relationship to mixing theory-glass forming.
Also covers growth of crystals, ther-
modynamics, transport processes, and kinetics
in relation to structures developed.

M. J. Cima

3.64 Special Problems in Ceramics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.641 Special Problems in Ceramics
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Explores advanced work in this field. Lectures,

conferences, assigned readings, and
laboratory work.
B. J. Wuensch

3.691-3.699 Teaching Materials Science
and Engineering

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching

under the supervision of a faculty member. Stu-
dents selected by interview. (Enrollment

limited by availability of suitable teaching as-
signments.)

K. C. Russell

3.70 Special Problems in Metallurgy

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.701 Special Problems in Metallurgy

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Minor investigation in one of the special
branches of metallurgy. (Open only to students
properly qualified in the special field.)

K. C. Russell

3.711J Materials for Nuclear
Applications

(Subject meets with 22.70J, 3.070J, 22.070/)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.70J.
K. C. Russell

3.80J Proseminar in Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.792J, 2.890J, 10.792J,
16.985J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.792J.
D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll

3.81J Engineering Probability and
Statistics

(Same subject as 6.430J, 15.064J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.430J.
A. W. Drake

3.83J System Optimization and Analysis for
Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.066J, 2.851J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.066J.
S. C. Graves, J. P. Clark

3.891 Structure and Properties of Materials

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03
G (Summer)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Structure-properties relationships in materials.
Electrons in atoms and molecules, metallic,
covalent, and ionic bonding and its relationship
to structure and properties of crystalline and
non-crystalline solids, structure and its deter-
mination in crystalline and non-crystalline
solids, the defect solid state: point, line, areal,
and volume defects. Mechanical electronic,
magnetic, and phototonic properties, their
measurement, and their relationship to struc-
ture.

K. C. Russell

330 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 2 ---
Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3

3.90J Fracture of Structural Materials

(Same subject as 1.591J, 13.16J)
Prereq.: 2.30 or 3.11 or 13.15

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes criteria for crack initiation and

propagation leading to structural failure.
Studies fracture mechanics starting with Grif-

Effects of geometry, rate, environment,

fatigue, temperature, , and
microstructure. Fracture behavior of welded
metals, heat-affected zone. Relation to disloca-

fiber-reinforced composites. Emphasizes cur-
rent research in field.
F. J. McGarry, K. Masubuchi

3.901 Special Problems in Polymer Science
and Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

3.902 Special Problems in Polymer Science

and Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced work in the field. Lectures, conferen-

ces, assigned readings, and laboratory work.
M. F. Rubner

3.903J Student Seminar in Polymer Science
and Technology

(Same subject as 10.960J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 10.960J.

R. E. Cohen, M. F. Rubner, G. C. Rutledge,
P. T. Hammond, E. W. Merrill

3.91J Mechanical Behavior of Plastics

(Same subject as 1.593J)
Prereq.: 3.064

G (Spring)

3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Relation among chemical composition, physi-

cal structure, and mechanical behavior of plas-
tics or synthetic high polymers. Study of types
of polymers; fundamentals of viscoelastic
phenomena such as creep, stress relaxation,
stress rupture, mechanical damping, impact;
effects of chemical composition and structure
on viscoelastic and strength properties;
methods of mechanical property evaluation. In-
fluences of plastics fabrication methods. Em-
phasis on recent research techniques and
results. Individual laboratory projects investigat-
ing problems related to current research.

F. J. McGarry, D. K. Roylance

3.911 Professional Development for
Technologists

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

An overview of generally nontechnical topics

useful to technical professionals in the in-
dustrial workplace, presented primarily by in-
vited guests from industry. Topics include:
personnel issues; presentation skills and
report/proposal writing; career strategy;
economics/finance; statistics in QC/QM, SPC;
marketing/sales; legal/government issues; criti-
cal thinking; leadership; corporate strategy;
project/engineering management.

T. W. Eagar

3.912 Polymer Processing
Prereq.: 3.064

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of principal methods used in shaping of

thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers and
polymer-matrix composites. Phenomenological
descriptions of hardware, and theoretical
modeling of relevant chemical and transport
phenomena. Role of processing in determining
microstructure, properties, and performance of

polymers.
C. E. Scott

3.92J Composite Materials

(Same subject as 1.594J)
Prereq.: 3.064

G (Fall)

3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concepts underlying formation, characteristics,

and behavior of plastics-based composites
such as fiberglass laminates, structural
sandwiches, plywood, and load-bearing ad-
hesive joints. Typical components such as me-
tals, glass, synthetic and natural adhesives,
plastics, foams, wood, paper, fabrics, and rub-
ber. Correlation between adhesion principles
and physical behavior. Methods of design,
analysis, fabrication, and testing. Discusses
failure mechanisms of chemical and mechani-
cal types. Individual laboratory projects inves-
tigating problems related to current research.
F. J. McGarry

3.930 Industrial Practice

Prereq.: —
U (Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

Enrollment restricted to students in Course III-

B. Provides academic credit for first approved
work assignment at a company. For reporting
requirements consult faculty industrial practice
coordinator.

M. C. Flemings

3.931 Industrial Practice

Prereq.: —
U (Summer)
0-6-0

Enrollment restricted to students in Course III-
B. Provides academic credit for second ap-
proved work assignment at a company. For
reporting requirements consult faculty in-
dustrial practice coordinator.

M. C. Flemings

3.932 Industrial Practice

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Provides academic credit for graduate students
in Course III-B for approved work assignments

at companies.
M. C. Flemings

3.94 Morphology of Polymers

Prereq.: 3.063

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6

Examines polymer structure from the atomic to
the micron scale. Structure of noncrystalline
polymers, structure and classification of
polymeric mesophases. Phase transforma-
tions, including classical nucleation theory and
spinodal decomposition. Polymer blends, seg-
mented and block copolymer morphology,
structure of crystalline polymers, lamella and
spherulites, deformation microstructures,
fibers, microcomposites. Characterization
methods such as wide- and small-angle x-ray
scattering and transmission electron micros-
copy are also covered. Alternate years.

E. L. Thomas

3.941J Statistical Mechanics of Polymers

(Same subject as 10.668J)

Prereq.: 10.568 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 10.668J.
A. Mayes, G. Rutledge

3.951J Deformation and Fracture of
Polymers

(Same subject as 2.921J)
Prereq.: 2.001 or 3.11

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.921J.
I. V. Yannas

3.96J Biomaterials — Tissue Interactions

(Same subject as 2.79J, HST.522J)

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 2.005 or 5.60; 7.012 or
7.013

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.79J.
1. V. Yannas, M. Spector

Descriptions of Subjects 331


--- 02.pdf Page 3 ---
School of Engineering

3.97J Mechanical Forces in Organ
Development and Remodeling

(Same subject as 2.785J, HST.523J)

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11; 2.005 or 5.60; 7.012 or
7.013

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.785u.
1. V. Yannas, M. Spector

3.98 Polymer Synthetic Chemistry

Prereq.: 3.062 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An examination of the fundamental reaction

mechanisms and chemistry of polymerization
reactions with an emphasis on the synthesis of
new advanced polymers.

M. F. Rubner

Archaeology and Archaeological
Science

3.980 Ancient Mexican Bells: Technology
and Context

(3.171)
Prereq.: —
U (IAP)
1-1-1

Metalsmiths in ancient Mexico cast large num-

bers of bells from copper and bronze. Subject
focuses on the technology of bell production
and the meaning of bell sounds and their uses
in ancient Mexican culture, through lectures
and laboratory work. Replicas of ancient
Mexican bells are made by copper smelting, al-
loying with tin, and lost-wax casting. Bell
sound qualities are measured and related to
materials properties and bell design charac-
teristics. The ancient technology is compared
to that of modern belimaking.

D. Hosler, S. M. Allen, L. W. Hobbs

3.981 Materials in Human Experience

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-3-3 HASS

Examines the ways in which people in ancient

and preindustrial societies selected, evaluated,
and used materials of nature, transforming
them to objects of material culture. Some ex-
amples: concrete in Roman cities; cloth as
power in the Inca state; the weaponry of the
Crusades (Damascus steel). Explores ideologi-
cal and aesthetic criteria often influential in
materials development. Laboratory/workshop
sessions provide hands-on experience with
materials discussed in class. Enrollment may
be limited. Alternate years.

D. Hosler, L. W. Hobbs, S. Allen

3.982 The Ancient Andean World

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

Examines development of Andean civilization

which culminated in the extraordinary empire
established by the Inca. Archaeological, eth-
nographic, and ethnohistorical approaches.
Particular attention to the unusual topography
of the Andean area, its influence upon local
ecology, and the characteristic social, political,
and technological responses of Andean
people to life in a topographically “vertical”
world. Characteristic cultural styles of prehis-
toric Andean life.

H. N. Lechtman

3.983 The Aztec, the Maya, and Their
Predecessors

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

Examines origins and florescence of the im-
pressive pre-Hispanic civilizations in area en-

lowland rainforest and the highland environ-
ments, extensive interregional exchange, and
sea trade with Central and South America in
explaining the spectacular achievements of
these indigenous American peoples.

D. Hosler

3.984 Materials in Ancient Societies: Metals
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-6-3

The laboratory analysis of archaeological ar-
tifacts helps us understand the societies that
produced them. This seminar-laboratory sub-
ject provides in-depth study of the tech-
nologies ancient societies used to produce
metal objects from native and smelted metals.
Seminars cover basic physical metallurgy and
relate materials selection and processing to en-
vironment, exchange, aesthetics, political
power, and cultural values. Senior under-
graduates may register for subject under a
Special Topics number; consult instructor.

H. N. Lechtman

3.985J Archaeological Science
(New)

(Same subject as 5.24J)

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11 or 8.01 or equivalent
U (Spring)

3-1-5 HASS

Pressing issues in archaeology as an
anthropological science. Stresses the natural
science and engineering methods ar-
chaeologists use to tackle them. Reconstruct-
ing time, space, and human ecologies
provides one focus; materials technologies
that transform natural materials to material cul-
ture provide another. Topics include 14C
dating, ice core and palynological analysis,
stable isotope chemistry of palaeodietary food-
webs, soil micromorphology and site forma-
tion, Pb isotope sourcing of metal artifacts,
and microstructural and mechanical analyses
of cementitious materials used in ancient
monumental buildings.

H. N. Lechtman, |. Oppenheim

332 Chapter VIil


--- 02.pdf Page 4 ---
Department of Materials Science and Engineering Course 3

3.986 Introduction to Archaeology
(Revised Units)

Humans have modified their natural environ-

ment for over two million years. Archaeology
reconstructs ancient human activity (subsis-
tence, architecture, materials processing, and
technology) and its environmental context from
material remains using specialized techniques,
many of which are laboratory-based. Drawing
on case studies in contrasting environmental
settings from the Americas and the Old World,
subject considers these activities and the for-
ces that shaped them. In laboratory sessions,
students analyze various classes of ar-
chaeological materials, among them ceramics,
stone, and metal.

H. N. Lechtman, H. V. Merrick

3.987 Human Origins and Evolution

(21A.105)
Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

Examines the dynamic interrelations among

physical and behavioral traits of humans and
environment and culture to provide an in-
tegrated framework for studying human biologi-
cal evolution and modern diversity. Topics
include issues in morphological evolution and
adaptation; fossil and cultural evidence for
human evolution from earliest times through
the Pleistocene; evolution of tool use and so-
cial behavior; modern human variation and
concepts of race. Includes study of stone ar-
tifacts and fossil specimens.

H. V. Merrick

3.988 Africa — Past and Present: An
Archaeological and Ethnographic Materials
Perspective

(214.455)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

Examines prehistory and modern ethnographic

diversity of technology on the African con-
tinent, with particular emphasis on the sub-
Saharan region. Traces the course of human
technological evolution from the earliest Plio-
Pleistocene tool-making hominids to the
modern ethnical diverse inhabitants of the con-
tinent, by way of topical case studies. These
cases are centered on subsistence adapta-
tions and technological responses. Includes
lectures, experience handling prehistoric stone
artifacts and modern ethnographic items, and
ethnographic films.

H. V. Merrick

3.989 Materials in Ancient Societies: Metals

(New)

Prereq.: 3.984
G (Spring)
0-6-3

The laboratory analysis of archaeological ar-

tifacts of metal. Follows on 3.984.
H. N. Lechtman

Descriptions of Subjects 333


--- 02.pdf Page 5 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

Course 4

4.UR Undergraduate Research in
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

4.URG Undergraduate Research in
Architecture

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Research and project activities, which cover

the range represented by the various research
interests and projects in the department. Stu-
dents who wish a letter grade option for their
work must register for 4 URG.

Staff

4.101 Introduction to Architectural Design |

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
3-3-6

First introductory architectural design studio.

Concemed with learning to read the built en-
vironment and understanding various ways of
ordering architectural form. Intended to give
students experience designing spaces through
models, Lectures on architectural theory ac-
company individual design projects.

E. Dunham-Jones

4.104 Introduction to Architectural Design Il

Prereq.: 4.101
U (Spring)
3-3-6

Second introductory architectural design studio

concerned with a disciplined observation of the
built environment. Intended to give students
the experience of using drawings to record
buildings. Emphasis on study of architectural
places in their context by observing qualities of
space, light, form and materials, and/or
projects indicating various ways in which build-
ings, landscape, and urban form can be
described and interpreted. Lectures, field
studies, sketches, drawings.

Architectural Design Staff

Architecture

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Architecture and Planning.

4.106 Design Skills Workshop
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

0-6-3

Supplements Level | Architectural Design

Studio. Emphasizes acquisition of drawing and
observational skills. Field trips, guest lectures,
and presentations focus on issues specific to
developing a design drawing repertoire. In-
dividual tutorials in graphic skills. Intended for
entering M.Arch. students.

Architectural Design Staff

4.123, 4.124 Architectural Design: Level I

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

0-12-6

Can be repeated for credit

4.125, 4.126 Architectural Design: Level I'

Prereq.: 4.104

U (Fall, Spring)

0-12-9

Can be repeated for credit

Establishes basic attitudes to architectural or-

ganization and its reflection in form. Includes
projects where imposed conditions of site, pro-
gram, and building system emphasize the inter-
relationship of fundamental elements in the
pattern of decision making that constitutes ar-
chitectural design. Develops presentations
through drawings and models. 4.123, 4.124 in-
tended for entering M.Arch. students; 4.125,
4.126 intended for juniors and seniors.
Architectural Design Staff

'Note about the subjects in Architectural Design: The
sequence in Architectural Design is a cumulative program. Its
successful completion by the student is subject to evaluation
by the staff independent of formal grades accumulated.

4.131, 4.132 Architectural Design: Level I'

Prereq.: 4.125, 4.126, 4.440
U (Fall, Spring)

0-12-9

Can be repeated for credit

4.143, 4.144 Architectural Design: Level I!'

Prereq.: 4.123, 4.124 or 4.125, 4.126
G (Fall, Spring)

0-12-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Projects develop awareness of the principal is-
sues facing the contemporary architectural
designer and the range of possibilities avail-
able for effective satisfaction of common en-
vironmental needs. Design for intensive,
extensive, and multiple space uses. Buildings
of multi-story construction. Considers natural
and artificial environmental controls as they in-
fluence the design concepts and the installa-
tions associated with them.

Architectural Design Staff

4.155, 4.156 Architectural Design: Level II!'

Prereq.: 4.144

G (Fall, Spring)

0-12-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Emphasizes setting of architectural work as
part of an organized community in projects
having to do with built-up areas, as well as
those on new sites. Studies plans for long-
range development, giving students increasing
experience in the analysis of real-life situations
requiring program research.

Architectural Design Staff

334 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 6 ---
Department of Architecture Course 4

4.163J Urban Design

(Same subject as 11.332J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

The design of urban environments. Strategies

for change in large areas of cities, to be
developed over time, involving different actors.
Fitting forms into natural, man-made, histori-
cal, and cultural outlooks; enabling desirable
activity patterns; conceptualizing built form;
providing infrastructure and service systems;
guiding the sensory character of development.
Involves architecture and planning students in
joint work; requires individual designs or
design and planning guidelines.

J. P. de Monchaux, M. Dennis

4.165 Architectural Design in Islamic
Societies

Prereq.: 4.231
G (Spring)
0-12-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Design studio exploring culture-specific

themes related to architecture and the urban
environment. Focuses on the design of a com-
plex of buildings within a central urban area.
Addresses the principal issues of form and cul-
tural appropriateness faced by designers in Is-
lamic and other nonwestern societies.

A. Petruccioli

4.171 The Space Between Workshop
Prereq.: 4.126

G (Fall)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Architectural design workshop focusing on un-

derstanding and designing the space between
objects as well as the objects themselves.
J. Wampler

4.172 Form Language Workshop
Prereq.: 4.126

G (Spring)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Architectural design workshop: the investiga-

tion, retrieval, assemblage, production, and/or
presentation of selected, salient, intrinsic or-
ganizational and/or associative “facts of form,”
attributes, principles, and/or behaviors.

M. K. Smith

4.173 Small Built-Collage

Prereq.: 4.143
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The intrinsic attributes/generative principles of

built- and landscape-form/additive directional
field organization. Progressions of intensifica-
tion have included surfaced relief, “habitable”
planar assemblages, territorial screens, and/or
full-size furniture; tile, marble, granite surfaces
and installations.

M. K. Smith

4.174 Design Workshop: School and
Community

Prereq.: 4.126
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focus on the design and programming of

K-12 schools in relation to community form,
culture, and economy. Research into issues
such as the “small school,” the school as com-
munity center, and the impact of technology on
school form; planning projects for school sys-
tems; investigation of alternatives to existing
school models.

R. Strickland

4.181-4.185 Architectural Design
Workshops

Prereq.: 4.131 or 4.143

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Form-making exercises that explore and/or in-

quire into a generic architectural design prob-
lem. The problem may be prototypical or a
particular aspect of a whole project; it is often
research-oriented and non-site specific.
Architectural Design Staff

4.188 Preparation for M.Arch. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.
Architectural Design Staff

4.189 Preparation for M.Arch. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of thesis topic, definition of method

of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.
Architectural Design Staff

4.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research and writing of

thesis; to be arranged by the student with su-
pervising committee.

4.191, 4.192 Special Problems in
Architectural Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

4.194 Special Problems in Architectural
Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

4.195, 4.196 Special Problems in
Architectural Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.199 Special Problems in Architectural
Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
Staff.

Architectural Design Staff

4.203 Geometric Modeling

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
Units arranged

Introduces the fundamentals of three-dimen-
sional geometric modeling and associated
computer-aided design and visualization ap-
plications in architecture, urban design,
product design, and computer animation.
Provides a theoretical foundation, an introduc-
tion to a selection of current hardware and
software tools, and extensive opportunities to
develop practical skills through hands-on lab
sessions and regular practical exercises. A
background of computational skills is an ad-
vantage, but not required. Successful comple-
tion enables students to acquire the skills
necessary to undertake independent CAD and
computer animation in design studios and
professional settings, and to undertake more
advanced subjects in this area.

W. J. Mitchell, J. Dorsey, T. Nagakura

4.204 Advanced Projects in Geometric
Modeling

Prereq.: 4.203

G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Provides an opportunity to undertake ad-
vanced projects in geometric modeling and as-
sociated computer-aided design and
visualization applications in architecture, urban
design, product design, and computer anima-
tion

W. J. Mitchell, J. Dorsey, T. Nagakura

Descriptions of Subjects 335


--- 02.pdf Page 7 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

4.205 Foundations of Design and
Computation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to the computational treatment

of design problems and processes. Presents
basic theoretical ideas and provides an over-
view of the relevant literature. Gives particular
attention to shape description, shape computa-
tion, shape grammars, and shape languages.
W. J. Mitchell

4.206 Visualization
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Explores the role of computer visualization as

a representational medium. Emphasizes the
visualization of light, color, surfaces, textures,
volumes, scientific data, buildings, landscapes,
and terrains, and introduces basic animation
techniques. Real and imaginary environments
are constructed, probed, and displayed. Also
covers the relevant computer graphics
methods.

J. Dorsey

4.207 Advanced Topics in Design and
Computation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Provides an opportunity for detailed explora-

tion of selected advanced topics in design and
computation. Supplementary work on in-
dividual or group basis. Registration subject to
prior arrangement for subject matter and super-
vision by staff.

W. J. Mitchell

4.208, 4.209 Special Problems in
Computation and Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
Staff.
Staff

336 Chapter VIII

4.210 Light, Color, and Computer Graphics

Prereq.: 4.203 or 4.206
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the effects of light and color in

architecture. Applies computer graphics as the
primary medium, along with direct observation,
basic mathematical analysis, and other forms
of representation, to help understand the com-
plex and interconnected nature of these
phenomena. Examines the distinction between
natural and artificial light, the related topic of
energy consumption, the color of light, and the
role of all of these in the shaping of buildings.
Also covers the relevant computer graphics
techniques. Open to qualified undergraduates.
J. Dorsey

4.214J Advanced Topics in Computer
Graphics
(New)

(Same subject as 6.838J)
Prereq.: 6.837 or 4.210

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

In-depth study of an active research topic in

computer graphics. Topics change each term.
Readings from the literature, student presenta-
tions, short assignments, and a programming
project.

J. Dorsey

4.218, 4.219 Special Problems in Urban
Housing

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
Staff.

M. Dennis, R. Goethert, R. Strickland

4,220 Urban Housing: Paris, London,
New York

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Analysis of the development of housing

models and their urban implications in Paris,
London, and New York City from the seven-
teenth century to the present. Focus on the
French hotel, London row house, and New
York City tenement and apartment building;
twentieth-century housing reform movements
and work by the London County Council,
CIAM, and American public housing agencies.
M. Dennis, R. Strickland

4.221 Architecture Studies Faculty
Colloquium

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Can be repeated for credit

Required subject for all first-year S.M.Arch.S.
students. Weekly presentations by faculty on a
selected theme followed by discussion. Re-
quirements include active student participation
and a final paper reviewing the general
theoretical issues raised by the theme and by
each faculty presentation.

Staff

4.222 Aspects of Office Practice

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An in-depth overview of the practice of ar-
chitecture. Structured to convey the myriad of
concerns and methodology associated with ar-
chitectural project development. Introduces the
student to the broad range of issues from of-
fice organization to steps and sequences re-
quired to facilitate, administer, and carry
through an architectural project. Explores the
architect's role as designer, project manager,
contact with client from predesign through con-
struction. Explores the expanding role of com-
puters in architectural practice. Combines
classroom discussions with site visits to
several architectural offices.

H. P. Portnoy

4.228, 4.229 Architectural Design
Seminar

Prereq.: 4.126

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Inquiries and/or explorations into a research
topic related to architectural design taught in a
seminar format. The work may supply the
basis for an architectural design workshop
and/or studio and/or lead a research proposal
and/or publication.

Architectural Design Staff

4.233 Special Interest Group in Urban
Settlements: SIGUS Workshops

(Same subject as 11.465J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Interactive interdisciplinary workshops which
focus on projects and practices on urban settle-
ment issues in developing countries
throughout the world. Participation by guest
practitioners.

R. Goethert, R. A. Gakenheimer, B. Sanyal


--- 02.pdf Page 8 ---
Department of Architecture Course 4

4.231 Architecture and Urban Contexts:
Traditions, Conflicts, and Change

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Workshop concerned with understanding the

built environment in Islamic and other non-
western and Western societies and with
developing appropriate strategies for change.
Uses case studies on specific urban places
that exhibit traditional, post-colonial, and
modern characteristics of urban and architec-
tural form, and that contain residences and es-
tablished institutions reflecting traditional
culture, as well as newer institutions reflecting
international culture and organizations. Focus
is on cultural and formal issues.

A. Petruccioli

4.235 Urbanization and Design in
Developing Countries

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (IAP)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Identifies and examines shifts in issues and ap-

proaches facing designers, from mass housing
to core housing to site and services. Focus on
housing design, land planning, and service
provision. Extensive case studies from Africa,
Latin America, and Asia.

R. Goethert

4,236J Structuring Low-Income Housing
Projects in Developing Countries

(Same subject as 11.463J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines relationship between housing needs

and practice from the perspectives of govern-
ment-sponsored projects. Emphasis on costs
recovery, affordability, replicability, user selec-
tion, and project administration. Extensive

case examples provide bases for comparisons.
R. Goethert

4.237 The New Practitioner: Dialogue Tools
and Techniques
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores a new paradigm of practice that con-

siders dialogue essential for efficacious and
creative design process. Focus on effective
dialogue with non-traditional client groups:
communities, the poor, and the generally ex-
cluded middle-income. Stress on hands-on ex-
perience with client groups. Supplemented
with background readings and presentations
by invited professionals.

R. Goethert

4.238, 4.239 Special Problems in
Non-Western Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

A. Petruccioli

4.241J Theory of City Form

(Same subject as 11.330J)

Prereq.: 11.001J or 4.252J or 11.301J
G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theories about the form that settlements

should take. Attempts a distinction between
descriptive and normative theory by examining
examples of various theories of city form over
time. Concentrates on the origins of the
modern city and theories about its emerging
form, including the transformation of the
nineteenth-century city and its organization.
Analyzes current issues of city form in relation
to citymaking, social structure, and physical
design.

J. Beinart

4.242J Advanced Seminar in City Form

(Same subject as 11.331J)

Prereq.: 4.241J, 11.330J

G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines in greater depth themes from the

basic subject in city form theory. Introduces
new concepts from current research and prac-
tice for analysis by the seminar participants.
Requirements include presentation to the semi-
nar of a theoretical project undertaken by each
student.

J. Beinart

4.244) Urban Design Seminar
(New)

(Same subject as 11.333J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

2-0-7

Seminar on the basic theories of urban design.

Includes morphological, structural, and proce-
dural approaches. Case studies of important
urban design efforts. Required for Urban
Design certificate students.

G. Hack

4.245J Cities of Tomorrow

(Same subject as 11.335J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.335J.
D. Frenchman

4.247J Environmental Design Policy and
Action

(Same subject as 11.337)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.337J.
J. P. de Monchaux

4.248, 4.249 Special Problems in City
Form

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

J. Beinart, M. Dennis

4.250J Introduction to Urban Design and
Development

(Same subject as 11.001J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 11.001J.
L. Vale

4.252) Urban Design and Development

(Same subject as 11.301J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9

See description under subject 11.301J.
D. Frenchman

4.253J Urban Design Politics

(Same subject as 11.302J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.302J.
L. Vale

4.254J Design for Urban Development

(Same subject as 11.303)

Prereq.: 11.447

G (Spring)

2-4-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.303J.
D. Frenchman, P. Roth

4.255J Site and Urban Systems Planning
(Revised Units)

(Same subject as 11.304J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

2-2-8

See description under subject 11.304J.
G. Hack, K. Hill

Descriptions of Subjects 337


--- 02.pdf Page 9 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

4.256J Housing and Urban Policy

(Same subject as 11.420J)
Prereq.: 11.200 or 4.144

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.420J.
Consult Department Headquarters.

4.257J Property Rights Under Transition

(Same subject as 11.467J, 17.550J)
Prereq.: 11.210 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.467J.
K. R. Polenske

4.259 Special Problems in Environmental
Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
Staff.

J. Beinart, M. Dennis

4.264 Environmental Psychology

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-3-6 HASS

Presents social science theories and methods

that apply to human transactions with a wide
range of environments. Focuses on develop-
ment of applied research skills relevant to suc-
cessful designing for human use, from urban
to machine interface. Readings reinforce lec-
tures and fieldwork. Semester projects dovetail
with student's field of interest.

S. C. Howell

4.265 Behavior in the Built Environment

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces behavioral science theories and

methods as they relate to interactive affects of
people in residential, working, and therapeutic
settings. Readings supplement lectures and
assigned fieldwork. Application of research
methods such as behavior mapping, interview-
ing, and perceptual measures in systematic
evaluations of environments in use and to
design programming.

S. C. Howell

338 Chapter Viil

4.266J User Needs Programming

(Same subject as 11.329J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A combination seminar and practicum in

design programming. Combines readings and
discussions on how to collect, select, and or-
ganize user information for use in the planning
and design process. Students are placed with
architecture firms, public or private community
agencies that have active projects requiring as-
sistance to inform their plans and designs.

S. C. Howell

4.269 Special Problems in Social Science
and Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

S. C. Howell

4.273 Introduction to Design Inquiry
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Explores, through exercises, lectures, and dis-

cussion, the nature and exercise of architec-
tural intelligence; investigates design as
processes located in individuals and in groups;
seeks to understand design as argument, as
claims for which reasons can be adduced, as
logic in which there are explicit sets of ele-
ments and relations among them, and as ex-
periment in which design and its results are
themselves used to inform future designs or
simply to inquire. Subject aims to open
avenues for further research.

W. L. Porter

4.276 Design Research Seminar

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

What guarantees does the designer have that

what is intended will be perceived? how can
one come to make reliable judgments about
the quality of designs? What constitutes good
design? Considers design in several ways: as
experience, as communication, as language,
as problem framing and solving, as logic. Each
of these has implications for how one thinks
about and evaluates design quality and for
how one designs an experiment to learn more
about design and designing. Students’ term
project is to design such an experiment.

W. L. Porter

4.278, 4.279 Special Problems in Theory in
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

W. L. Porter

4.280 Architecture Internship

Prereq.: 4.125 or 4.126

U (IAP)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Work in an architect's office to gain ex-
perience, improve skills, and see the inner
workings of an everyday architectural practice.
Internships in all sizes of firms and in public
and nonprofit agencies. Internships require full-
time work for the entire IAP. Nonpaying.

A. Pendleton-Jullian

4.285, 4.286 Research Topics in
Architecture Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Research work on individual or group basis.
Registration subject to prior arrangement for
subject matter and supervision by staff.

Staff

4.288 Preparation for S.M.Arch.S. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

4.289 Preparation for Architecture
Studies — Ph.D. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.
Architecture Studies Staff


--- 02.pdf Page 10 ---
Department of Architecture Course 4

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

4.292, 4.293 Special Problems in
Architecture Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, |AP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.294 Special Problems in Architecture
Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

4.295-—4.298 Special Problems in
Architecture Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.299 Special Problems in Architecture
Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.
Staff

4.301 Foundations in the Visual Arts

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
2-4-6 HASS-D, Category 3

Introduces artistic thinking as a mode of dis-
covery. Investigates art making as a means of
thinking and how thinking and feeling are
linked to making. Examines the ways artistic
media (video, sculpture, computer imaging) as
modes of thought inform our investigation and
exploration of artistic vision. Lab fee.

R. Taho

4.322 Introduction to Sculpture

Prereq.: 4.301
U (Fall, Spring)
2-4-6 HASS

Examines fundamental issues in sculpture
such as form in space, site, and context as
well as issues of and the tem-
poral dimensions in sculpture. Explores the
relationships between concept, materials, and
process. Lab fee.

R. Taho

4.325 Advanced Sculpture

Prereq.: 4.322
U (Fall, Spring)
2-4-6

Explores the conceptual and formal issues in

sculpture, including site and environment,
time, audience, the relation of material and ob-
ject to context, and the relationship of sculp-
ture to social and cultural issues.

R. Taho

4.341 Introduction to Photography
Prereq.: 4.301

U (Fall, Spring)

2-4-6 HASS

Investigates fundamental issues in photog-

raphy and the nature of the photographic
image as well as nontraditional ways of explor-
ing the photographic vision. Explores relation-
ship of image to language as well as the
issues of meaning, interpretation, and their
relationship to culture. Lab fee. Limited enroll-
ment.

E. Levine

4.351 Introduction to Video

Prereq.: 4.301
U (Fall, Spring)
2-4-6 HASS

Explores fundamental issues in video such as

the nature of the video image, narrative, and
video time. Explores video as a sculptural, en-
vironmental, and narrative form. Looks at the
issues of interpretation and meaning and how
they relate to historical, social, and cultural is-
sues. Limited enrollment.

E. Levine

4.361 Dimensions of the Body

Prereq.: 4.301, 4.322; 4.341 or 4.351
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-4-6 HASS

Explores how the body relates to thinking and

making, how feelings and attitudes about the
body affect the processes, judgments, and
values involved in art and design. Looks at
how issues of gender, culture, and history re-
late to issues of the body and art making.

E. Levine

4.362 Dimensions of Time

Prereq.: 4.301

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-4-6 HASS

Explores methods of conceiving and develop-

ing constructs about temporal experiences, in-
vestigating how we interact with various
manifestations of time from mechanical clocks
to biological time. Develops ideas about tem-
porality and examines how time is embodied in
history, memory, dreams, and everyday ex-
periences as well as in other arts. Time and its
manifestations are used as an inspiration for a
series of studio-based projects. Lab fee.

E. Levine

4.364 Dimensions in Space

Prereq.: 4.301

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
2-4-6 HASS

Examines the different spatial worlds we live in
and construct. Explores the relationship be-
tween public and private spaces, sacred and
profane, and the relationships of those ex-
periences to the space of our bodies. Inves-
tigates how we move from one spatial
construct to another and how these constructs
are inseparable from the nature of our exist-
ence. Explores how our culture and society af-
fect our conceptions and understanding of our
spatial worlds.

E. Levine

4.366 Advanced Projects in Visual Arts

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

2-4-6 HASS

Can be repeated for credit

Investigates conceptual and formal issues in
different media or between media such as
sculpture, photography, and video. Explores is-
sues of representation, interpretation, and
meaning, and how they relate to historical, so-
cial and cultural context.

E. Levine

4.371 Art and the Environment

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

Reviews art, architecture, and celebrations
and their positions in workday, religious, and
political life. Reconsiders the present position
of art and redefines the artist’s options in the
contemporary environment. Examines fact and
changes effected by current science and tech-
nology vis-a-vis our place in nature and history.
Staff

4.372 Environmental Art

Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

0-4-8 HASS

Design and planning of environmental art in-
Stallations in given and chosen existing set-
tings. Emphasizes daring ideas in conjunction
with realistic approach and possibility for ex-
ecution. Artistic means ranging from large-
scale painting and graphic design to kinetic
architecture and natural elemental growth-and-
change systems and to sound and video instal-
sng and performances.

Stai

4.378 Special Problems in Environmental
Art

Prereq.: 4.372
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
Staff.
Staff

Descriptions of Subjects 339


--- 02.pdf Page 11 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

————————.wwrw..— III

4.381, 4.382 Advanced Visual Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

0-9-12 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual concepts, projects, design, and ex-

ecution of installations, objects, and events in
environmental art and performance involving
elemental and science-technology means and
media.

Staff

4.385—4.387 Special Problems in
Environmental Art

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Special work on an individual or group basis

using specific means such as video, holog-
raphy, and multimedia. Registration subject to
prior arrangement of subject matter and super-
vision by staff.

Staff

4.388 Preparation for S.M.Vis.S. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.

E. Levine

4.391—4.393 Special Problems in Visual Arts

Prereq.: 4.301

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

4.394 Special Problems in Visual Arts

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

4.395—4.397 Special Problems in Visual Arts

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.398, 4.399 Special Problems in Visual Arts

Prereq.: 4.301, 4.322

G (Fall, |AP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

E. Levine

340 Chapter Vill

4.401 Introduction to Building Technology

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-3-6

Explores the application of building technology

to architecture through considerations of build-
ing construction—materials and methods—
and re, enclosure, climate
and utility services, light, acoustics, fire safety,
and accessibility. Includes lectures, laboratory
exercises, site visits, and problem sets, but em-
phasizes a semester-long student investigation
of a precedent building, culminating in a term

paper.
Building Technology Staff

4.405 Materials and Construction
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-1-5

Materials and methods of construction are es-

sential elements for the built realization of
design. Knowledge of the inherent as well as
potential properties of building materials is ap-
plied to selected contemporary construction
types and current processes of construction.
Understanding of the integration of materials
as functioning built form is fostered in lectures,
case studies, and field trips. Attention is paid
to the importance of working details as part of
a techncially coordinated whole. Several short
exercises to test the student's skill in applying
theory to practice.

Building Technology Staff

4.408, 4.409 Special Problems in Building
Construction

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
Staff.

Building Technology Statf

4.411 Building Technology Laboratory

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
2-4-6 Institute LAB

Concepts of building technology and ex-

perimental methods explored in a laboratory
setting. Experimental projects include measure-
ment of thermally driven airflows in model
buildings, investigation of lighting intensity and
glare, design and test of daylighting and pas-
sive solar strategies in model buildings, meas-
urements of heat flow and thermal storage,

and structural inquiry including load-deforma-
tion of materials, structural elements, and struc-
tural systems. Computers used for data
acquisitions, analysis, and simulation.

L. K. Norford

4.42J Fundamentals of Energy in Buildings

(Same subject as 1.42J, 2.45J)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02

Introduction to energy fundamentals important
to buildings. Conservation of energy. Proper-
ties of pure substances, gas mixtures,
psychrometrics. Heat pumps and refrigeration
cycles, limiting thermodynamic performance.
Heat transfer within buildings and major com-
ponents. Several creative design projects are
assigned.
L. R. Glicksman

4.425 Energy in Building Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Pe (Spring)
1-5

en aspects of thermal phenomena, ther-
mal comfort, and climate relevant to building
design, and applies concepts and methods to
energy-efficient building design. Topics include
thermodynamics, psychrometrics, comfort, in-
door air quality and air distribution, solar radia-
tion, climate, space heating and cooling loads,
and lighting. Emphasizes a quantitative under-
standing of energy fundamentals; examples
from practice, and design exercises.

Q. Chen

4.426 Energy, Environment, and Buildings
Workshop

Prereq.: 4.425

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4-2-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Builds on an understanding of energy fun-
damentals by treating in depth one or more
aspects of the influence of building design on
energy use. Stresses life-cycle energy, includ-
ing energy embodied in building materials, cur-
rent information on material selection and its
effect on indoor air quality, and the flow of
energy and materials across the building en-
velope. Case studies and a significant design
exercise.

L. K. Norford

4.427J Analysis and Design of Heating,
Ventilating, and Air Conditioning Systems
(New)

(Same subject as 2.46J)
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.51

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the fundamentals of heating, ventilat-
ing, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems. Dis-
cussion of psychrometrics, air conditioning
processes, thermal comfort, indoor air quality
and outdoor design conditions; concentration
on the calculation of heating and cooling load
in order to size suitable HVAC equipment; es-
timation of energy consumption of the HVAC
equipment. Introduces both manual and com-
puter methods. One site visit.

Q. Chen


--- 02.pdf Page 12 ---
Department of Architecture Course 4

4.428, 4.429 Special Problems in Energy in
Buildings

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

L. R. Glicksman, L. K. Norford

4.43 Architectural Acoustics

Prereq.: 4.401
U (Fall)
3-0-6

Describes interactions between people and
sound, indoors and outdoors, and uses this in-
formation to develop acoustical design criteria
for architecture and planning. Physical prin-
ciples of sound generation, propagation, and
reception. Properties of materials for sound ab-
sorption, reflection, and transmission. Techni-
ques and data used to provide good hearing
conditions, and to control noise in rooms, build-
ings, and the environment. Practical examples
and case-histories.

C. J. Rosenberg

4.440 Basic Structural Theory

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-3-6 REST

Introduces the static behavior of structures
and strength of materials. Reactions, truss
analysis, stability of structures. Stress and
strain at a point, shear and bending moment
diagrams. Stresses in beams, Mohr’s Circle,
column buckling. Deflection of beams.
Laboratory to solve structural problems by
building simple models and testing them.
Building Technology Staff

4.441 Introduction to Building Structural
Systems |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6

Introduction to the principles of structural be-
havior, analysis, and design. Emphasis on in-
dividual structural elements and simple
strategies for load carrying. Topics include es-
timating loads, introduction to statics, sectional
attributes, and basic discussions of stress and
Strain; all set against background discussions
of design and the overall issues affecting each
structural element. Structural types examined
include beams, trusses, simple frames, ar-
ches, and cables.

Building Technology Staff

4.442 Introduction to Building Structural
Systems Il

Prereq.: 4.441
G (Fall)
3-0-6

A continuation of 4.441, subject completes the

exploration of structural elements: column
buckling, frame analysis, and funicular struc-
tures: arches, cables. Discussion includes:
bending as a form generator; review of overall
strategies for load carrying, both vertically and
laterally; how load-carrying strategies are im-
plemented in systems; and how these systems
are designed.

Building Technology Staff

4.446 Structures Design Workshop

Prereq.: 4.442
G (Spring)
2-4-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced methods of structural analysis in the

development of structural form for architectural
and urban design projects. Strategies of
design for static and dynamic lateral loadings.
Quantitative analysis, using computational
methods, and qualitative analysis, reading criti-
cal literature, of innovative or trend-setting
structures to better understand structural be-
havior, formal order, and tectonic character.
Building Technology Staff

4.448, 4.449 Special Problems in Structural
Design

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary structural design on individual

or group basis. Registration subject to prior ar-
rangement for subject matter and supervision
by staff.

Building Technology Staff

4.451 Building Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
0-3-6

Exposes the student to the nature and variety

of technological innovation in the building con-
struction sector. Explores innovative ap-
proaches to rationalized methods of
construction, as applied to generic building
types. Views building systems as a total
process, including the integration of project or-
ganization, production, and erection. Includes
discussion of prefabrication and industrializa-
tion. Students are required to conduct in-
dividual research on related topics, including
the presentation of relevant case studies.

E. Diuhosch

4.453 Building Technology in Real Estate
Decision Making

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Reviews building systems and technologies
with an emphasis on their impact on real es-
tate decision making. Topics include building
location, foundation and structural systems,
enclosure, climate control, electrical and com-
munications systems, plumbing, and fire and
disaster safety. Assignments include weekly or
bi-weekly analysis or case-study problems, as
well as a semester-long analysis and proposal
project focusing on an existing building asset.
Grading is based upon all written work and the
oral presentation of a final project.

Building Technology Staff

4.455 Integrated Building Systems

Prereq.: 4.405, 4.425, 4.441, 4.442
G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Capstone of the technology sequence in the
M.Arch. program. Emphasizes technologies re-
lated to structure, enclosure, climate, and light.
Consideration of theory and issues related to
manufacturing, construction and systems in-
tegration, and architectural design. Qualitative
and quantitative analysis of precedents via
computational tools, models, drawings, and
written reports. Identification of appropriate
technological systems for new designs on the
basis of system integration and support of ar-
chitectural objectives.

P. J. Donnelly

4.461 Building Simulation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Mathematical modeling of air flow in building in-
terior as well as whole-building systems for pur-
poses of: building energy analysis, airflow
analysis, and contaminant dispersal analysis;
measurement of thermal and flow charac-
teristics of buildings; and control of mechanical
systems to affect thermal comfort, energy con-
servation, and indoor air quality. Uses com-
putational fluid mechanics. Application to
practical and current research problems.
Building Technology Staff

4.471 Control of Space Conditioning
Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9

Analysis of methods of conditioning buildings,
their control and energy consumption. Topics
include methods of heating, cooling, and ven-
tilating buildings and associated control
strategies. Control analysis and design based
on root-locus plots, frequency response, and
state-space methods. Energy management
systems, including optimization and on-line

i

analysis.
L. K. Norford

Descriptions of Subjects 341


--- 02.pdf Page 13 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

4.481 Building Technology Seminar
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to ongoing research activities in

building technology. Topics drawn from indoor
air quality and thermal comfort, building sys-
tems analysis and control, building energy
uses, and new building materials and construc-
tion techniques. Organized as a series of two-
to three-week sessions that consider topics
through readings, discussions, design and
analysis projects, and student presentations.

L. K. Norford, L. R. Glicksman

4.488 Preparation for S.M.B.T. Thesis

4.489 Preparation for Building Technology

Ph.D. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.

Building Technology Staff

4.491—4.493 Special Problems in Building
Technology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.494 Special Problems in Building
Technology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

4.497, 4.498 Special Problems in
Building Technology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.499 Special Problems in Building
Technology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group

basis. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff. 4.491-4.493 are letter-graded.
Building Technology Staff

4.601 Introduction to Art History
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 3

Develops skills and knowledge essential to the

description, analysis, and interpretation of
visual artifacts through comparative analysis of
works of art drawn from many cultures and
time periods. Works in a wide range of media
from the Americas, Europe, Africa, and Asia
serve as case studies for investigation of the
processes by which art objects acquire mean-
ings and value for particular audiences. Also
examines the questions art historians tradition-
ally have asked about works of art and the
means they have developed to answer them.
M. Leja

4.602 Modern Art and Mass Culture

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 3

Discusses the history of painting and design

from the mid-nineteenth century through the
1980s in relation to emerging visual tech-
nologies (lithography, photography, the poster,
photomontage), urban audiences, and con-
sumer culture. Major artistic movements (Im-
pressionism, Cubism, Russian Constructivism,
Pop Art) are examined in relation to critical and
theoretical writings about the relationship be-
tween the traditional arts and mass culture. No
previous knowledge of art history is required.
L. W. Kinney

4.605 Introduction to the History and
Theory of Architecture

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 3

Provides an outline of the history of architec-

ture and urbanism from Ancient Egypt to the
present. Analyzes buildings as the products of
culture and in relation to the special problems
of architectural design.

D. H. Friedman

4.607 Thinking About Architecture: In
History and At Present

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Subject on the problem of a history of architec-

ture in terms not only of the formal end
products, but also in relation to the structure of
ideas and the cultures that have guided the for-
mal productions. Addresses the present condi-
tion in architecture as much as the past and
covers case studies from Vitruvius to the twen-
tieth century.

HTC Staff

4.609 Seminar in the History of Art and
Architecture

Prereq.: Four subjects in the 4.6xx series
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall or Spring)

3-0-9

Examination of historical method in art and/or
architecture focusing on periods and problems
determined by the research interest of the
faculty member leading the seminar. Em-
phasis on critical reading and viewing and
direct tutorial guidance. Extensive discussion.
D. H. Friedman, L. W. Kinney

4.613 Civic and Residential Islamic
Architecture

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

Studies select examples of palatial, residential,
commercial, and landscape architecture in the
Islamic world in chronological order. Examines
the formation and developments of architec-
tural traditions, their possible models, their sur-
vival, their regional transformations, and the
various influences at different historical junc-
tions, all within the framework of the general Is-
lamic culture.

N. Rabbat

4.614 Religious Architecture and Islamic
Culture

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 3

Reviews the history of religious architecture in
the Islamic World, and discusses its develop-
ment in light of a changing Islam from a reform
movement in seventh-century Arabia to a
global power straddling three continents in the
medieval period to the common religion of a
number of competing empires in the pre-
modern and smaller states in the modern
periods. Presents Islamic architecture both as
a full-fledged historical tradition and as a
dynamic and interactive cultural catalyst that in-
fluenced and was influenced by the several
civilizations with which it came into contact.
This diversity of exchanges produced the
various architectural manifestations that dot
the historical and geographic map of the Is-
lamic World.

N. Rabbat

4.615 The Architecture of Cairo

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 HASS

A thorough examination of the urban and ar-
chitectural history of Cairo from the initial settle-
ments on the site (640s) to the twentieth
century. Investigates the development of
Cairene architecture both in its Islamic and
Mediterranean contexts and in light of the cul-
tural, political, and social history of the city and
the country. Focuses on the medieval period
(eleventh to fifteenth century) when Cairo was
the largest Mediterranean metropolis and a cul-
tural and intellectual center of the Islamic world.
N. Rabbat

342 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 14 ---
Department of Architecture Course 4

4.616 Cultural Signification in Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar on the issue of meaning in architec-
ture. Establishes historical and theoretical
frameworks for investigations. Analyzes tradi-
tions, transformations, and inventions in ar-
chitecture as a conveyor of messages that
transcend the stylistic, formal, and
iconographic domains to include an assess-
ment of some of the political, ideological, so-
cial, and cultural concerns of the builders and
patrons both synchronically and diachronically.
Critically reviews the methodologies and
theoretical premises of studies on meaning
and iconography in architecture.

N. Rabbat

4.617 Issues in Islamic Urbanism

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on selected topics from Islamic urban

history. Examines patterns of urbanization and
architectural production in several cities. Dis-
cusses the leading factors in shaping civic
forms and structures. Critically reviews the
body of literature concerned with the Islamic
City. Research paper required. Open to
qualified undergraduates.

N. Rabbat

4.621 Orientalism and Representation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar on the politics of knowledge, i.e., how

political and ideological attitudes, concerns,
and biases inform, and sometimes dictate, the
representation, codification, and reproduction
of knowledge. Critically reviews selected texts,
illustrations, and institutional traditions which
have been influential and/or paradigmatic in
shaping the concepts and images of the Is-
lamic Orient. Challenges the tacit assumptions
and biases of the Orientalist conventions, and
of the more recent essentialist trends in repre-
senting Islam. Research paper required.

S. Bozdogan, N. Rabbat

4.623 Technology and the Modern Project

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces technology as a historical, cultural,

and philosophical problem integral to the
project of modernity. Reviews aesthetic,
ideological, and epistemological appropriations
of technology in the architectural culture of the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, from
“house-machines” to “virtual space.” Focuses
on the significance and status of technology in
the critical debates concerning modernity —
between dwelling and transience, between
alienation and liberation, between critical
programs of resistance to instrumental
rationality and radical programs to extend the
modern project further.

S. Bozdogan

4.624 Architecture and Modernization in the
Middle East, 19th and 20th Centuries

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A historical survey of important architectural

and urban transformations in the Middle East
from the nineteenth century modernizing
reforms in the Ottoman Empire to the current
crisis of secular nationalisms and the emer-
gence of Islam as a contending project of
civilization. Lectures cover such topics as the
transformation of architectural education and
practice, the introduction of modem architec-
ture and planning, the work of western ar-
chitects and firms, the emergence of
nationalist, regionalist, and Islamicist discour-
ses. Related readings for discussion.

S. Bozdogan

4.626 Architecture and Post-Colonial
Identity
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Addresses the role of architecture in the
making of modern national identities in the late
nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Focuses
on construction and symbolism of national
styles in architecture in Europe and in
colonial/post-colonial contexts outside Europe.
Investigates the complex interplay of the
utopic and universalist visions of twentieth cen-
tury modernism and the cultural and political
expressions of nationhood through appropria-
tion of history and/or vernacular traditions.
Readings of key texts on nationalism, moder-
nity, and identity.

S. Bozdogan

4.627 Special Problems in Islamic and
Nonwestern Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

4.628, 4.629 Special Problems in Islamic
and Nonwestern Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Supplementary work on individual or group
basis in the history, theory, and criticism of ar-
chitecture and urban form in the Islamic World.
Registration subject to prior arrangement for
subject matter and supervision by staff.

S. Bozdogan, N. Rabbat

4.635 Renaissance Architecture

Prereq.: 4.605

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

A history of the architecture of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries in Italy. The formation and
development of the classical style, drawing
and mode! making, the relationship between
architecture and the fine arts, buildings and
their patrons, architectural theory, architecture
and politics.

D. H. Friedman

4.638 Advanced Study in Renaissance
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall or Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on a selected topic from Renaissance
architecture. Requires original research and
presentation of oral and written reports.

D. H. Friedman

4.639 Advanced Study in 16th-, 17th-, and
18th-Century Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on a selected topic from architecture
of the period. Requires original research and
presentation of oral and written reports.

H. A. Millon

Descriptions of Subjects 343


--- 02.pdf Page 15 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

—_—_—oe———[

4.641 19th-Century Art

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4-0-8 HASS

Survey of major artists and movements in
nineteenth-century French painting, from Neo-
Classicism to Post-Impressionism. Emphasis
on emerging phenomena and concepts charac-
teristic of the century, including: new visual
technologies (lithography, photography,
posters), the avant garde, the dealer/critic sys-
tem, the museum and exhibition space, and
the engagement of art with issues of class,
gender, and politics.

L. W. Kinney

4.642 Advanced Study in Modern Art

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on a selected topic from modern art,

stressing theoretical or critical issues of con-
temporary concern. Requires original research
and presentation of oral and written reports.

L. W. Kinney

4.643J Modern Art and Sexuality

(Subject meets with SP.476, SP.477J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Explores the impact of recent critical thinking

about representation, gender, and sexual dif-
ference on traditional understandings of moder-
nism and methods of interpretation in the
visual arts. Artists, issues, and types of im-
agery vary from year to year, but always in-
clude consideration of nineteenth-century
painters of the nude (Courbet, Manet, Degas),
theories of the construction of sexuality, and
an introduction to feminist film theory. Open to
qualified undergraduates.

L. W. Kinney

4.645 Selected Topics in Architecture —
1750 to the Present

Prereq.: 4.605
G (Spring)
3-0-6

General study of modern architecture in
Europe and America in the context of architec-
tural and social programs. Focuses on impor-
tant problems and architectural proposals of a
certain period to be analyzed using a variety of
examples. Instead of supporting the idea of a
linear development, it explores alternative
“clusters” of architectural history. Required of
all first-year M.Arch. Students. Midterm and
final exams.

HTC Staff

4.647 Advanced Study in the Theory and
History of Historic Preservation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar on the development and critical is-

sues of historic preservation. Analyzes the
questions of monument and memory, historic
preservation in the urban context, the polemics
in modern preservation theory, and the design
of new buildings in historic settings. Requires
research, oral presentations, and written study.
HTC Staff

4.651 20th-Century Art

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
4-0-5 HASS

The history of twentieth-century modernism

and its internal contradictions, from Cubism
and Futurism to the present. Considers espe-
cially the formation of anti-artistic attitudes in
Dada and Surrealism, the constructivist and
productivist project of integrating art and
society and the contemporary post-modern
critiques of the avant-garde.

HTC Staff

4.653 Advanced Study in 20th-Century
Art

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on a selected topic from twentieth-

century art. Requires original research and
presentation of oral and written reports.
HTC Staff

4.654—4.659 Advanced Study in Modern
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar or lecture on a selected topic in the ar-

chitecture of the late eighteenth century to the
present, in Europe and America. Requires
original research and presentation of oral and
written reports.

S. Anderson, Staff

4.660 The Architectural Agenda

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar on the history and the theory of ar-

chitecture seen as an epistemological question
within the wider context of knowledge. Discus-
sion seminar that especially addresses
problems in architectural research.

HTC Staff

4.661 Theory and Method in the Study of
Architecture and Art

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Studies theoretical and historiographical works
pertaining to the fields of architecture, art, and
environmental studies. Members of seminar
pursue work designed to examine their own
presuppositions and methods. Open only to
Ph.D. candidates and other advanced stu-
dents.

HTC Staff

4.662 Advanced Study in the History of
Urban Form

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on a selected topic in the history of
urban form. Requires original research and
presentation of oral and written reports.

D. H. Friedman

4.663 History of Urban Form

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies in the history of the physical city from
Antiquity to the present, with points of special
focus determined by the instructor. Analyzes
the typologies of urban buildings, public
places, and city plans in their relation to chang-
ing contexts of culture, politics, and the struc-
ture of public and private institutions.

D. H. Friedman

4.665 Contemporary Architecture and
Critical Debate

Prereq.: 4.123 or 4.125
G (Fall)
3-0-6

Critical review of works, theories, and polemics
of the last twenty-five years. Aim is a historical
understanding of the period and the develop-
ment of a meaningful framework to assess the
present situation in architecture. Intended for
M.Arch. students.

E. Dunham-Jones

4.666—4.669 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Architecture and
Urban Form

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Special topics in the history, theory, and
criticism of architecture and urban form, vary-
ing at the discretion of the instructor.

HTC Staff

344 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 16 ---
Department of Architecture Course 4

4.680—4.682 Advanced Studies in the
History, Theory, and Criticism of Art and
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Additional credit for extended project work in
connection with a seminar with invariable
units. Registration subject to prior arrange-
ment for subject matter and supervision by
staff.

HTC Staff

4.689 Preparation for History, Theory, and
Criticism — Ph.D. Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of thesis topic, definition of method
of approach, and preparation of thesis
proposal. Independent study supplemented by
individual conference with faculty.

HTC Staff

4.691 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Art

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

4.692, 4.693 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Art

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual or group projects on topics in the his-
tory, theory, and criticism of art. Registration
subject to prior arrangement for subject matter
and supervision by staff.

HTC Staff

4.694 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Art and
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

4.695 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Architecture and
Urban Form

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

4.696—4.698 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Architecture and
Urban Form

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

4.699 Special Studies in the History,
Theory, and Criticism of Art and
Architecture

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Individual and group projects in the history,
theory, and criticism of art and/or architecture.
Registration subject to prior arrangement for
subject matter and supervision by staff.

HTC Staff

Descriptions of Subjects 345


--- 02.pdf Page 17 ---
School of Science

Course 5

5.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

5.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of research to be arranged by the stu-

dent and a departmental faculty member.
Department Coordinator: K. A. Nelson.

5.03 Principles of Inorganic Chemistry |

Prereq.: 5.12
U (Spring)
4-0-8

Presents principles of chemical bonding and

molecular structure, and their application to
the chemistry of representative elements of
the periodic system.

A. Davison, R. R. Schrock

5.04 Principles of Inorganic Chemistry Il

Prereq.: 5.03
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Systematic presentation of the chemical ap-

plications of group theory. Emphasis is placed
on the formal development of the subject and
applications to determine the infrared and
electronic spectra, magnetic properties, struc-
ture, and other features of transition metal
complexes amenable to theoretical analysis.
Elementary crystallography and space group
theory. 5.61 background encouraged.

C. C. Cummins

5.05 Principles of Inorganic Chemistry Ill

Prereq.: 5.03, 5.04
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Extended treatment of some special topics of

current interest in modern inorganic chemistry.
The material is presented in two parts. The
first part is a comprehensive overview of solid-
state inorganic chemistry; the second part em-
phasizes main group chemistry.

D. Seyferth, H. zur Loye

Chemistry

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter Vil under the School of Science.

5.061 Principles of Organometallic
Chemistry
(New)

Prereq.: 5.03, 5.04
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A comprehensive treatment of organometallic

chemistry of the transition metals with an em-
phasis on catalysis and mechanisms.
R. R. Schrock

5.062 Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry
(New)

Prereq.: 5.03
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Choice, uptake, assembly of metal-containing

units; control and use of metalions; metal fold-
ing and cross-linking of biomolecules; electron-
transfer proteins; substrate bindings and
activation; atom and group transfer chemistry;
protein tuning of metal properties in biology;
frontiers of bioinorganic chemistry.

S. J. Lippard

5.068 Physical Methods in Inorganic
Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to physical methods and their ap-

plication to inorganic chemical compounds. In-
cludes diffraction methods; electronic
photoelectron spectroscopy; vibrational and
rotational spectroscopy; magnetic measure-
ments; including magnetic and electron spin
resonance; Méssbauer spectroscopy; mass
spectrometry; electrochemical measurements.
Case histories, with the complementary use of
selections of the various methods described.
A. Davison

5.07 Biological Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.12

U (Fall)

5-0-7 REST

Credit cannot also be received for 7.05

Description of the organization and functioning
of living organisms in terms of molecular struc-
tures and processes. Chemical and physical
properties of cell and tissue constituents, in-
cluding carbohydrates, lipids, nucleic acids,
and proteins. Origin of catalysis in biological
systems. Metabolic synthesis and degradation
of amino acids, carbohydrates, fats, and
origins and fates of macromolecules as well as
chemical bases of regulation and integration of
metabolic phenomena.

A. Klibanov, L. Stern

5.071J Biochemistry Laboratory

(Subject meets with HST.410J, TOX.209)
Prereq.: 5.07, and 5.310 or 5.311

U (Spring)

2-8-2

Introduces experimental biochemistry techni-
ques in four modules centered on the study of
the enzyme B-galactosidase. Protein purifica-
tion and enzyme kinetics are combined with
basic molecular biology techniques that are es-
sential for modern protein biochemistry. The
four modules are 1) enzyme purification;

2) gene cloning; 3) site-directed mutagenesis;
4) enzyme kinetics. Kinetic analysis of wild
type and mutant enzymes with substrates and
inhibitors performed. Meets with graduate sub-
ject TOX 209, but assignments differ.

J. Williamson, P. Dedon

5.11 Principles of Chemical Science

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 CHEMISTRY

Introduction to chemistry, with emphasis on
basic principles and their applications. In-
cludes atomic and molecular electronic struc-
ture, thermodynamics, acid-base and redox
equilibria, chemical kinetics, reaction
mechanisms, catalysis, and aspects of metal
coordination chemistry and organic chemistry.
Fall Term: R. W. Field, R. J. Silbey, Staff
Spring Term: A. M. Klibanov, W. H. Orme-
Johnson

346 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 18 ---
Department of Chemistry Course 5

5.12 Organic Chemistry |

Prereq.: 5.11

U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7 REST

Introduction to chemistry. Develop-

troduction to the chemistry of aromatic
compounds.

Fall Term: D. S. Kemp

Spring Term: S. L. Buchwald, G. C. Fu

5.13 Organic Chemistry Il

Prereq.: 5.11, 5.12
U (Spring)
5-0-7

Intermediate organic chemistry. Synthesis,

structure determination, mechanism, and the
relationships between structure and reactivity
emphasized. Special topics in organic
chemistry included to illustrate the role of or-
ganic chemistry in biological systems and in
the chemical industry.

R. L. Danheiser, Staff

5.22J Biotechnology and Engineering

(Same subject as 10.02J, TOX.105J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

4-0-5

\llustrates how the principles of chemistry, biol-

ogy, and engineering are integrated to create
new products for human health and consump-
tion. Uses case-study format to examine
recently developed products of pharmaceutical
and biotechnology industries: how a product
evolves from initial idea, through patents, test-
ing, evaluation, production, and marketing. Em-
phasizes scientific and engineering principles,
as well as the responsibility scientists, en-
gineers, and business executives have for the
consequences of their technology.

J. M. Essigmann, R. S. Langer

5.23J Atmospheric Chemistry

(Subject meets with 12.340J, 5.68)
Prereq.: 5.60

U (Spring)

3-0-9

See description under subject 12.340J.
M. J. Molina, J. |. Steinfeld

5.24J Archaeological Science
(New)

(Same subject as 3.985J)

Prereq.: 3.091 or 5.11 or 8.01 or equivalent

U (Spring)

3-1-5 HASS

Pressing issues in archaeology as an
anthropological science. Stresses the natural
science and engineering methods ar-
chaeologists use to tackle them. Reconstruct-
ing time, space, and human ecologies
provides one focus; materials technologies
that transform natural materials to material cul-
ture provide another. Topics include 14C
dating, ice core and palynological analysis,
stable isotope chemistry of palaeodietary food-
webs, soil micromorphology and site forma-
tion, Pb isotope sourcing of metal artifacts,
and microstructural and mechanical analyses
of cementitious materials used in ancient
monumental buildings.

H. N. Lechtman, |. Oppenheim

5.310 Laboratory Chemistry
Prereq.: 5.12

U (Fall, Spring)

2-8-2 Institute LAB

Introduces experimental chemistry for students

who are not majoring in Course V. Principles
and applications of chemical laboratory techni-
ques, including preparation and analysis of
chemical materials, measurement of pH, gas
and liquid chromatography, visible-ultraviolet
spectrophotometry, infrared spectroscopy,
kinetics, data analysis, and elementary syn-
thesis. Enrollment limited.

Fall Term: W. H. Orme-Johnson, D. Seyferth
Spring Term: C. C. Cummins, Staff

5.311 Introductory Chemical
Experimentation

Prereq.: 5.12
U (Fall)
2-8-2 Institute LAB

First term of a three-term laboratory subject se-

quence for Course V majors. Experimental
work emphasizes development of fundamental
laboratory skills and techniques: volumetric
and colorimetric analysis; nuclear magnetic
resonance; preparation, purification, and char-
acterization of chemical substances; and data
analysis. Enrollment limited to 50 students. En-
rollment limited to Course V majors only.

H. zur Loye, R. G. Griffin

5.32 Intermediate Chemical Experimentation

Prereq.: 5.311 or 5.310, 5.13, 5.60
U (Spring)
0-12-3

Experimental work more advanced than in
5.310 or 5.311, emphasizing thermodynamic
and kinetic measurements of organic reac-
tions; and synthesis, purification, and analysis
of organic compounds employing IR, NMR,
UV, mass spectroscopy, and thin layer and
gas-liquid phase chromatography.

S. C. Virgil, Staff

5.33 Advanced Chemical Experimentation
and Instrumentation

Prereq.: 5.32, 5.67
U (Fall)
2-13-6

Advanced experimentation, with particular em-
phasis on chemical synthesis and the fun-
damentals of quantum chemistry illustrated
through molecular spectroscopy. Projects in-
clude computer-interfaced IR, NMR, and
picosecond laser spectroscopy; synthesis of or-
ganometallics under inert atmosphere; and
polymer synthesis and characterization.

K. A. Nelson

5.43 Advanced Organic Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.13
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Application of structure and theory to the study
of organic reaction mechanisms: stereochemi-
cal features including conformation and
stereoelectronic effects; reaction dynamics,
isotope effects and molecular orbital theory ap-
plied to pericyclic and photochemical reac-
tions; special reactive intermediates including
carbenes, carbanions and free radicals.

G. C. Fu, S.C. Virgil

5.44 Organometallic Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.43
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examination of the most important transforma-
tions of organotransitionmetal species. Em-
phasizes basic mechanisms of their reactions,
structure-reactivity relationships, and applica-
tions in synthesis.

S. L. Buchwald

5.45 Biorganic Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.43

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics discussed in the context of protein and
nucleic acid chemistry: binding forces,
catalysis, enzyme models, allostery, complexa-
tion, cooperativity, transport, replication, recog-
nition, and supramolecular assemblies.

Staff

5.46 NMR Spectroscopy and Organic
Structure Determination

Prereq.: 5.43

G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Applications of 1D and 2D 'H and *C NMR
spectroscopy to organic structure determina-
tion.

S. Masamune, S. C. Virgil

Descriptions of Subjects 347


--- 02.pdf Page 19 ---
School of Science

5.47 Tutorial in Organic Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.43, 5.511, 5.44 or 5.45
G (Fall)
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Detailed discussions of the basic principles of

importance to organic chemistry. The program
is intended primarily for new graduate students
in organic chemistry.

S. L. Buchwald, R. L. Danheiser, G. C. Fu,

S. Masamune, S. C. Virgil

5.48J The Protein Folding Problem

(Same subject as 7.88J, 10.543)
Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05 or equivalent
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 7.88J.
J. A. King

5.50 Enzymes: Structure and Function
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 5.07, 5.12, 5.13
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasis on methods available to elucidate

the mechanisms of enzymes involved in pep-
tide bond hydrolysis, phospho mono- and di-
ester bond cleavage, oxidations and reduc-
tions (NADH, flavins, PQQ, pterin, and metal
dependent), carbon-carbon bond forming and
breaking reactions. Tools such as steady-state
and presteady-state kinetics, isotope effect
measurements, site-directed mutagenesis,
mechanism base inhibitors applied to inves-
tigate mechanisms of enzymes that have been
well-characterized structurally.

J. Stubbe

5.511 Synthetic Organic Chemistry |
Prereq.: 5.43

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the design of syntheses of com-

plex organic compounds.
R. L. Danheiser, Staff

5.512 Synthetic Organic Chemistry Il

Prereq.: 5.511
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General methods and strategies for the syn-

thesis of complex organic compounds.
S. Masamune

5.52 Advanced Biological Chemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concepts and methods of biochemistry, with

emphasis on quantitative aspects of problem
analysis. Intended primarily for new graduate
students in biological chemistry.

L. Stern, J. Stubbe

5.53 Molecular Structure and Reactivity

Prereq.: 5.13, 5.60
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reaction mechanisms in organic chemistry:

types of mechanisms, reactive intermediates,
methods of investigation, relation of structure
to reactivity.

F. D. Greene

5.56 Special Topics in Organic
Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.511

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced topics of special current interest.

Staff

5.561 Chemistry in Industry
Prereq.: 5.13

G (Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examination of recent advances in organic,

biological, and inorganic chemical research in
industry. Taught in seminar format with par-
ticipation by scientists from industrial research
laboratories.

R. L. Danheiser, Staff

5.60 Thermodynamics and Kinetics
Prereq.: 18.02, 5.11

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8 REST

Equilibrium properties of macroscopic sys-

tems. Basic the’ ics: state of a sys-
tem, state variables. Work, heat, first law of
thermodynamics, thermochemistry. Second
and third law of thermodynamics: entropy.
Gibbs function, phase equilibrium properties of
solutions. Chemical equilibrium of reactions in
gas and solution phase. Rates of chemical
reactions.

Fall Term: C. W. Garland, B. Tidor

Spring Term: M. G. Bawendi, R. J. Silbey

5.61 Physical Chemistry
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02, 5.11
U (Fall)

4-0-8 REST

Introductory quantum chemistry; particles and

waves; wave mechanics; atomic structure and
the Periodic Table; valence and molecular orbi-
tal theory; molecular structure; photochemistry.
S. T. Ceyer

5.62 Physical Chemistry

Prereq.: 5.60, 5.61

U (Spring)
4-0-8

Elementary statistical mechanics; transport

properties; kinetic theory; solid state; reaction
rate theory; chemical reaction dynamics.
B. Tidor

5.63 Molecular Spectroscopy: Laser and
Magnetic Resonance Techniques

Prereq.: 5.61, 5.62

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Review of the interaction of radiation with
quantum systems; introduction to the basic
principles of modern optical and magnetic
resonance spectroscopy. Topics in optical
spectroscopy focus on an introduction to
lasers and laser spectroscopic methods (laser-
induced fluorescence, double resonance,
resonance Raman, CARS, etc.). In magnetic
resonance, topics include pulsed and Fourier-
transform NMR and EPR, multiple dimensional
techniques, magic-angle spinning, and quad-
rupole echoes. Applications of these methods
to the studies of the structure and dynamics of
liquids and solids.

R. W. Field

5.64 Biophysical Chemistry

(Subject meets with 7.71)
Prereq.: 5.60, 5.07 or 7.05
U (Fall)

3-0-9

Principles of biophysical chemistry introduced
with discussion of the structure, folding,
stability, and interactions of proteins and
nucleic acids. Topics include: an overview of
protein and nucleic acid structure; introduc-
tions to X-ray crystallography, spectroscopy,
and 2D NMR; thermodynamic and kinetic
aspects of protein folding; and principles of
protein-nucleic acid interactions. Molecular
mechanics introduced as a unifying tool that re-
lates structure, molecular forces, and ther-
modynamic quantities. Meets with graduate
subject 7.71. Students who take 7.71 cannot
also receive credit for 5.64.

J. R. Williamson, C. O. Pabo

5.68 Kinetics of Chemical Reactions

(Subject meets with 12.340J, 5.23J)
Prereq.: 5.62

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Experimental and theoretical aspects of reac-
tive and inelastic molecular processes, includ-
ing collision and transition — state theories,
homogeneous reactions in gas and liquid
phases, molecular beam scattering, informa-
tion theory of kinetic processes. Case studies
in chemical kinetics, including atmospheric
chemistry and combustion dynamics. Ad-
vanced undergraduate students need permis-
sion of instructor.

J. |. Steinfeld

5.70 Introduction to Statistical
Thermodynamics

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews classical thermodynamics and intro-
duces elementary statistical mechanics, with

applications to simple physical and chemical

systems.

|. Oppenheim

348 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 20 ---
Department of Chemistry Course 5

5.72 Statistical Mechanics

Prereq.: 5.70, 5.73, 18.075
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles and methods of statistical

mechanics. Classical and quantum statistics,
grand ensembles, fluctuations, molecular dis-
tribution functions, and other topics in equi-
librium statistical mechanics. Topics in
thermodynamics and statistical mechanics of ir-
reversible processes.

C. Garland, |. Oppenheim

5.73 Introductory Quantum Mechanics |

Prereq.: 5.61, 8.03, 18.03
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental concepts of quantum mechanics:
wave properties, uncertainty principles,
Schrodinger equation, operator and matrix
methods. Basic applications to: one-dimen-
sional potentials (harmonic oscillator), three-
dimensional centrosymetric potentials
(hydrogen atom), angular momentum and
spin. Approximation methods: WKB method,
variational principle, perturbation theory.

M. G. Bawendi

5.74 Introductory Quantum Mechanics Il

Prereq.: 5.73, 18.075
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Time-dependent quantum mechanics, with em-
phasis on molecular spectroscopy. The tradi-
tional “eigenstate” picture of spectroscopy; the
“wavepacket dynamics” pictures. Computer cal-
culation of wavepacket dynamics and spectro-
scopic observables.

K. A. Nelson

5.76 Molecular Spectra and Molecular
Structure

Prereq.: 5.61 or 5.73 or 8.05
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Atomic spectra. Rotational, vibrational, and
electronic spectra of diatomic and polyatomic
molecules. Assignment of spectra. Structural
parameters, molecular models, and effective
Hamiltonian matrices. Breakdown of the Born-
Oppenheimer approximation. Group theory,
selection rules, normal coordinates. Laser
spectroscopy.

R. W. Field

5.77J Topics in Metabolic Biochemistry

(Same subject as 7.75J)
Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 7.75J.
G. M. Brown, J. Liu

5.80 Special Topics in Chemical Physics

Prereq.: 5.73

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance,

with emphasis on dynamics of spin systems.
Staff

5.89 Special Problems in Chemistry for
Undergraduates

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of study to be arranged by the stu-

dent and a departmental faculty member. A let-
ter grade is given in this activity.
K. A. Nelson

5.891 Special Topics in Chemistry for
Undergraduates

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Program of study to be arranged by the stu-

dent and a departmental faculty member.
Staff

5.90 Special Problems in Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Directed research and study of special chemi-

cal problems. For graduate students only.
D. Seyferth

5.913 Seminar in Organic Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

1-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

5.914 Seminar in Organic Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

1-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discusses current journal publications in or-

ganic chemistry by graduate students and staff
members.
R. L. Danheiser

5.92 Seminar in Environmental Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

A seminar for graduate trainees in the
“Chemistry of the Environment” program, and
open to other interested graduate and ad-
vanced undergraduate students, which addres-
ses technical, economic, political, and
environmental issues of chemistry and society.
Seminar is intended to give trainees participat-
ing in individual research groups that address
widely different aspects of chemistry some
common ground for thinking about environmen-
tal issues, and to develop a wide range of
views about how society should deal with the
interactions between chemical technology and
the environment.

J. |. Steinfeld

5.931 Seminar in Physical Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

1-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

5.932 Seminar in Physical Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

1-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discusses topics of current interest in physical
chemistry by staff members and students.
B. Tidor

5.941 Seminar in Inorganic Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

1-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

5.942 Seminar in Inorganic Chemistry

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

1-0-2 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discusses current research in inorganic
chemistry by graduate students and staff.
R. R. Schrock

5.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of a Ph.D. thesis; to be arranged by the
student and an appropriate MIT faculty mem-
ber.

Descriptions of Subjects 349


--- 02.pdf Page 21 ---
School of Engineering

Course 6

Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
For degree requirements, see listing in

Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.

Basic Undergraduate
Subjects

6.001 Structure and Interpretation of
Computer Programs

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
5-3-7 REST

Control of complexity in large programming

systems. 1) Building abstractions: computation-
al processes; higher-order procedures; com-
pound data; data abstractions. 2) Controlling
interactions: generic operations; self-describ-
ing data; message passing; streams and in-
finite data structures. 3) Meta-linguistic
abstraction: interpretation of programming lan-
guages; machine model; compilation; em-
bedded languages. Substantial weekly
programming assignments are an integral part
of the course. Enrollment may be limited. 4 En-
gineering Design Points.

W. E. L. Grimson, R. A. Brooks

6.002 Circuits and Electronics
Prereq.: 8.02 or 8.022; 18.03 or 18.06
U (Fall, Spring)

4-2-9 REST

Fundamentals of lumped networks, resistive

elements and networks, energy storage ele-
ments, dynamics of first- and second-order net-
works, network equivalence theorems,
electronic devices, circuits, and applications.
Design exercises. Alternate week laboratory.
Students with appropriate experience in
electronic circuits may treat the 8.02 prereq-
uisite as a corequisite. Enrollment may be
limited. 4 Engineering Design Points.

J. K. Roberge

6.003 Signals and Systems

Prereq.: 6.001, 6.002
U (Fall, Spring)
4-2-9

Laplace transform and its applications to net-

works and electronic systems including feed-
back. Description of linear time-invariant
systems in the time and frequency domains;
convolution, Fourier series and integrals. Un-
certainty relations and sampling theorems. Dis-
crete-time systems and signals. Applications to
analog and digital filtering systems and
modulation systems. 4 Engineering Design
Points.

J. K. White

6.004 Computation Structures

Prereq.: 6.001, 6.002
U (Fall, Spring)
4-3-8

Introduces architecture of digital systems, em-

phasizing structural principles common to a
wide range of technologies. Multilevel im-
plementation strategies; definition of new primi-
tives (e.g., gates, instructions, procedures,
processes) and their mechanization using
lower-level elements. Analysis of potential con-
currency; precedence constraints and perfor-
mance measures; pipelined and
multidimensional systems. Instruction set
design issues; architectural support for contem-
porary software structures. 4 Engineering
Design Points.

S.A. Ward

6.011 Introduction to Communication,
Control, and Signal Processing

Prereq.: 6.003, 6.041

U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8

Input-output and state-space models of linear

systems driven by deterministic and random
signals; time- and transform-domain repre-
sentations. Sampling, discrete-time processing
of continuous-time signals. State feedback, ob-
servers. Probabilistic models; stochastic
processes, correlation functions, power
spectra, whitening filters. Detection; matched
filters. Least-mean square error estimation;
Wiener filtering.

A. V. Oppenheim, G. C. Verghese

6.012 Electronic Devices and Circuits

Prereq.: 6.003, 8.02
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8

Modeling of electronic devices and analysis of

nonlinear circuits. Physical electronics of semi-
conductor junction and MOS devices. Relation
of electrical behavior to internal physical
processes; development of circuit models; un-
derstanding limitations of models. Application
of incremental and large-signal techniques for
analyzing circuits containing nonlinear devices.
Analysis of bipolar and field effect transistor cir-
cuits, with examples chosen from single-ended
and differential amplifiers, logic inverters, and
other integrated circuits. Design project. 4 En-
gineering Design Points.

C. G. Fonstad, Jr.

6.013 Electromagnetic Fields and Energy

Prereq.: 6.002, 8.02
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Maxwell's equations and the Lorentz force law.
Quasistatic forms of Maxwell's equations.
Studies of electro-quasistatic fields and their
sources through solutions of Poisson's and
Laplace’s equations. Steady conduction and
polarization. Charge relaxation. Magneto-
quasistatic approximation; magnetic boundary
value problems, magnetization, induction, cur-
rent induced in stationary and moving conduc-
tors. Electric and magnetic forces derived from
energy. Electromagnetic waves. Extensive use
of engineering examples.

A. J. Grodzinsky

6.014 Electrodynamics

Prereq.: 6.002; 8.02 or 8.022 or 8.02X
U (Spring)
4-0-8

Plane waves in three dimensions; radiation
from elementary electric dipoles, current dis-
tributions, and arrays; diffraction and inter-
ference. Waves on continuous transmission
lines, periodic structures, and dielectric and
metallic waveguides; propagation and evanes-
cence; energy flow and impedance matching.
Phase and group velocity. Natural frequencies
and modes of closed electromagnetic struc-
tures; coupling to resonant structures. Ex-
amples taken from the fields of quasistatics,
acoustics, optics, and microwaves.

J. A. Kong, D. H. Staelin

6.021J Quantitative Physiology:
Cells and Tissues

(Subject meets with 2.791J, 2.794J, 6.5214,
HST.541J)

Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.002 or 6.071 or 10.301;
8.02, 18.03

U (Fall)

5-2-5

Principles of mass transport and electrical sig-
nal generation for biological membranes, cells,
and tissues. Mass transport through
membranes: diffusion, osmosis, chemically
mediated, and active transport. Electric proper-
ties of cells: ion transport; equilibrium, resting,
and action potentials. Kinetic and molecular
properties of single voltage-gated ion chan-
nels. Laboratory and computer exercises il-
lustrate the concepts. For juniors and seniors.
Meets with graduate subject 6.521J, but as-
signments differ. Students interested in en-
hancing their written and oral presentation
skills, see subject 6.080J. 4 Engineering
Design Points.

T. F. Weiss, D. M. Freeman

350 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 22 ---
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

6.022J Quantitative Physiology: Organ
Transport Systems

(Subject meets with 2.792J, 2.796J, 6.522J,

HST.542J)

Prereq.: 2.006 or 6.013; 6.021J

U (Spring)

4-2-6

Application of the principles of energy and
mass flow to major organ systems of humans
and other mammals. Mechanisms of regula-
tion and homeostasis. Anatomical, physiologi-
cal, and pathophysiological features of the
cardiovascular, respiratory, and renal systems.
Emphasis on those systems, features, and
devices that are most illuminated by the
methods of physical sciences. Laboratory work
includes some animal studies. Waiver of
6.021J by permission of instructor. 2 Engineer-
ing Design Points.

R. G. Mark, R. Kamm

6.023J Quantitative Physiology: Sensory
and Motor Systems

(Same subject as 2.793J, 16.401J, HST.543J)

Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.003 or 16.060
U (Spring)
3-2-7

Studies of sensory and motor physiology, with

objectives of establishing quantitative models.
Peripheral signal processing in eye, ear, and
vestibular systems. Physiology and
psychophysics of audition, vision, orientation,
and body stabilization. Organization of
neuromuscular and proprioceptive systems at
level of spinal cord reflex. Postural control and
kinetics of movement. Supplemented by
laboratory exercises. 6.021J recommended
background. 3 Engineering Design Points.

L. S. Frishkopf, C. Wall Ill, N. Hogan, L. Young

6.033 Computer System Engineering

Prereq.: 6.004
U (Spring)
4-0-8

Topics on the engineering of computer
software and hardware systems: techniques
for controlling complexity; networks and dis-
tributed systems; atomicity and coordination of
parallel activities; recovery and reliability;
privacy of information; impact of computer sys-
tems on society. Case studies of working sys-
tems and outside reading in the current
literature provide comparisons and contrasts. 4
Engineering Design Points.

M. F. Kaashoek

6.034 Artificial Intelligence

Prereq.: 6.001
U (Fall)
4-4-4

Studies the ideas and techniques that enable

computers to behave intelligently. Applications
of search, constraint propagation, rule chain-
ing, frame inheritance, and other problem-solv-
ing techniques in expert systems, robotics, and
natural-language understanding. Regularity-
based, explanation-based, and neural net
learning. Symbolic and nonsymbolic ap-
proaches to sensing, locomotion, and
manipulation in complicated environments.

P. H. Winston, T. Lozano-Pérez

6.035 Computer Language Engineering

Prereq.: 6.170
U (Fall)
4-4-4

Analyzes issues associated with the implemen-

tation of higher-level programming languages.
Fundamental concepts, functions, and struc-
tures of compilers. The interaction of theory
and practice. Using tools in building software.
includes a multi-person project on compiler
design and implementation. 8 Engineering
Design Points.

J. V. Guttag

6.036 Problem-Solving Paradigms
Prereq.: 6.034

U (Spring)

4-0-8

Investigates the basic paradigms for problem

solving including the use (and misuse) of logic,
procedural knowledge, debugging skills, and
the reformulation of problems. Detailed study
of natural deduction, pattern-directed proce-
dures, and systems for reasoning effectively
and efficiently within stereotypical situations.
Examples drawn from mathematics, natural
language comprehension, and programming.
Applications of theoretical results to human
problem solving and education.

C. E. Hewitt

6.038 Artificial Intelligence in Practice
(New)

Prereq.: 6.034
U (Spring)
3-4-5

Investigates the application of the methods

and tools of artificial intelligence to problems in
science, engineering, business, and entertain-
ment. Emphasis on mastery and application of
programs embodying many basic repre-
sentations and problem-solving methods in ar-
tificial intelligence, including search, constraint
propagation, rule-chaining, planning, deduc-
tion, and machine learning. Includes an in-
dividual and a multi-person project on real
problems drawn from a variety of disciplines.
Substantial programming experience required.
8 Engineering Design Points.

T. Lozano-Pérez

6.041 Probabilistic Systems Analysis

(Subject meets with 6.431)
Prereq.: 18.02

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8 REST

Modeling, quantification, and analysis of uncer-

tainty. Formulation and solution in sample
space. Random variables, transform techni-
ques, simple random processes and their prob-
ability distributions, Markov processes, limit
theorems, elements of statistical inference,
and decision making under uncertainty. Inter-
pretations, applications, and lecture
demonstrations. Meets with graduate subject
6.431, but assignments differ.

A. W. Drake

6.042J Mathematics for Computer Science

(Same subject as 18.062J)
Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7

Mathematical tools and methods for computer
science and engineering. Emphasis on
development of rigorous thinking, analytical
skills, and mathematical sophistication while
learning elementary discrete mathematics.
Topics: mathematical proofs; induction and
well-ordering; divisibility and congruences;
asymptotic notation and growth of functions;
sets, relations, functions, and graphs; counting
theory; recurrences and generating functions;
discrete probability.

C. E. Leiserson, F. T. Leighton, R. L. Rivest

6.044J Computability, Logic, and
Programming

(Same subject as 18.423J)
Prereq.: 6.042J or 18.310
U (Spring)

3-0-9

Introduction to theory of programming lan-
guages, logic, and computability. Operational
behavior and mathematical meaning of impera-
tive and functional programs. A fully developed
and implemented “substitution model” for the
Scheme language. Logical assertions and pro-
gram specification. Validity, truth, and
provability. Undecidable problems in logic and
programming. Incompleteness theorem for
first-order arithmetic. Introduction to denota-
tional semantics of programs.

A. R. Meyer

6.045J Automata, Computability, and
Complexity

(Same subject as 18.400J)
Prereq.: 6.046J

U (Spring)

4-0-8

Slower paced than 6.840J/18.404J. Introduces
basic mathematical models of computation
and the finite representation of infinite objects.
Finite automata and regular languages. Con-
text-free languages. Turing machines. Partial
recursive functions. Church's Thesis. Un-
decidability. Reducibility and completeness.
Time complexity and NP-completeness. Prob-
abilistic computation. Interactive proof systems.
N. A. Lynch

6.046J Introduction to Algorithms

(Same subject as 18.410J)
Prereq.: 6.001; 6.042J

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8

Techniques for the design and analysis of effi-
cient algorithms, emphasizing methods useful
in practice. Topics: sorting; data structures for
sets: search trees, heaps, hashing; graph algo-
rithms: shortest paths, depth-first search, net-
work flow; computational geometry; vos. al
arithmetic: gcd, primality; polynomial

matrix calculations; dynamic Pantin:
amortized analysis; NP-completeness and ap-
proximation algorithms.

C. E. Leiserson, M. Goemans

Descriptions of Subjects 351


--- 02.pdf Page 23 ---
School of Engineering

6.061 Introduction to Electric Power
Systems

Prereq.: 6.002, 6.013

U (Spring)

3-0-9

Fundamentals of energy-handling electric cir-

cuits and electromechanical apparatus. Model-
ing of magnetic field devices and description of
their behavior using appropriate models.
Simplification of problems using transformation
techniques. Power electric circuits, magnetic
circuits, lumped parameter electromechanics,
elements of linear and rotating electric
machinery. Modeling of synchronous, induc-
tion, and de machinery.

J. L. Kirtley, Jr.

6.070J Electronics Project Laboratory

(Same subject as SP.705J)
Prereq.: —

U (IAP, Spring)

2-2-2

Introduction to electronics test equipment such

as oscilloscopes, meters (voltage, resistance
inductance, capacitance, etc.), and signal gen-
erators. Hands-on format emphasizes in-
dividual instruction and development of skills,
such as soldering, assembly, and troubleshoot-
ing. Students build and keep an electronics kit,
such as AM-FM superhetrodyne radio, to
serve as the vehicle for learning about
electronics test and measurement equipment.
No previous background in electronics re-
quired.

J. K. Vandiver, B. D. Wedlock

6.071 Introduction to Electronics
Prereq.: 18.01, 8.02

U (Fall)

4-2-6 REST

Introductory subject suitable for students with

little or no previous background in electronics.
Elementary network theory, diode and transis-
tor circuits, analysis and design of analog and
digital circuits. Examples emphasize uses of
electronics in experimental science. Alternate
week laboratory. 4 Engineering Design Points.
L. D. Braida, B. D. Wedlock

6.080J Practicum in Engineering Writing
and Oral Presentation—Quantitative
Physiology: Cells and Tissues

(Same subject as 21W.802J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

2-0-4

See description under subject 21W.802J.

T. F. Weiss, E. Barrett, D. M. Freeman

6.090-6.094 Special Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

6.095-6.099 Special Subjects in Electrical

Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Basic undergraduate subjects not offered in

the regular curriculum. Consult Department to
learn of offerings for a particular term. Registra-
tion by permission of instructor.

A. C. Smith

Undergraduate Laboratory
Subjects

6.100 Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science Laboratory

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual experimental work related to electri-

cal engineering and computer science not
covered by other subjects. Student must make
arrangements with a project supervisor and file
a proposal endorsed by the supervisor.
Departmental approval required. Written report
to be submitted upon completion of work. If
6.100 is used to satisfy Departmental
Laboratory Requirement, student must register
for 12 units of laboratory credit in the term the
work is done. Consult Department Under-
graduate Office early in the term.

A. C. Smith

6.101 Introductory Analog Electronics
Laboratory

Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071
U (Fall, Spring)
2-9-1 Institute LAB

Introductory experimental laboratory focusing

on the design and construction of analog
electronic circuits. Initial lectures and
laboratory projects investigate the perfor-
mance and characteristics of discrete and in-
tegrated-circuit components. Design and
implementation of independent project.
Provides opportunity to focus on real-world
problems with complex objectives and solu-
tions that involve tradeoffs and the use of en-
gineering judgement. 12 Engineering Design
Points.

B. M. Roscoe

6.111 Introductory Digital Systems
Laboratory

Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071 or 16.040
U (Fall, Spring)
3-7-2 Institute LAB

Lectures and labs on digital logic, flipflops,
PALs, counters, timing, synchronization, finite-
state machines and microprogrammed sys-
tems prepare students for the design and
implementation of a final project of their
choice, @.g., games, music, digital filters,
graphics, etc. Possible use of lab report for
Phase II of the Writing Requirement. Six extra
units possible via adding 6.919 after project
proposal. 12 Engineering Design Points.

J. L. Kirtley, Jr., D. E. Troxel

6.115 Microcomputer Project Laboratory

Prereq.: 6.111 or 6.004
U (Fall)
3-6-3

Students complete three projects involving
microprocessors. The first introduces basic
hardware, software, and development tools
and provides experience with interrupts, A/D
converters, communication, digital signal
processing and control. The second em-
phasizes planning, testing, and achieving
specific goals and involves a team effort to
build a microprocessor system. The third, of
the student's choice, emphasizes creativity
and uniqueness, Lectures accompany the first
two projects and cover related material. 12 En-
gineering Design Points.

R. D. Thorton

6.121J Bioelectronics Project Laboratory

(Same subject as HST.575J)
Prereq.: 6.002 or 6.071

U (Spring)

2-8-2 Institute LAB

Project Laboratory in electronic instrumenta-
tion, interfacing the analog and digital world.
Students specify design, implement, and
evaluate biomedical instruments, including
several interrelated analog and digital subsys-
tems. Extensive use of integrated analog cir-
cuits and a microprocessor. Classroom
development of analytic models for complex
functional components and the measurement
process in the context of a longitudinal
laboratory project. Written report will meet the
requirements of Phase II writing. 12 Engineer-
ing Design Points.

S. K. Burns, R. G. Mark

6.151 Semiconductor Devices Project
Laboratory

Prereq.: 6.152J

U (Spring)

0-12-0 Institute LAB

Student use of the Microelectronics Laboratory
facilities for individual or team projects in the
area of design, fabrication, modeling, and char-
acterization of individual MOS or bipolar
devices, microsensors or microactuators, and
integrated circuits using these devices. Each
term, the project topics are selected to fit the
general areas of development in the
Laboratory. Enroliment limited. 12 Engineering
Design Points.

M. A. Schmidt, C. G. Sodini

352 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 24 ---
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

6.152J Microelectronics Processing
Technology

(Same subject as 3.155J, 10.480J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

U (Fall, Spring)

3-4-5

Introduces the theory and technology of in-
tegrated-circuit fabrication. Lectures and
laboratory sessions on basic processing techni-
ques such as diffusion, oxidation, epitaxy,
photolithography, chemical vapor deposition,
and plasma etching. Emphasis on the inter-
relationships between material properties,
device structure, and the electrical behavior of
devices. Provides background for thesis work

in microelectronics or for 6.151. 6 Engineering
Design Points.

M. A. Schmidt, C. G. Sodini, H. H. Sawin,

C. V. Thompson, K. K. Gleason, L. C. Kimerling

6.161 Modern Optics Project Laboratory

Prereq.: 6.003, 6.013
U (Fall)
2-8-2 Institute LAB

Lectures, laboratory exercises, and projects in
modern optics. Topics: polarization properties
of light, reflection and refraction, coherence
and interference, Fraunhofer and Fresnel dif-
fraction, imaging and transforming properties
of lenses, spatial filtering, coherent optical
processors, holography, optical properties of
materials, lasers, nonlinear optics, electro-
optic and acousto-optic materials and devices,
optical detectors, fiber optics, and optical com-
munication. Seniors may use this laboratory to
find an advanced undergraduate project. 12
Engineering Design Points.

C. Warde

6.163 Strobe Project Laboratory

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
2-8-2 Institute LAB

A project laboratory for experiments, dealing
mainly with the characteristics of electronic
flash sources of light and their applications to
photography and measurement problems. A
program of experimentation concemed with
electronic flash, organized with each group of
students at the start of the term. 12 Engineer-
ing Design Points.

C. H. Mazel

6.170 Laboratory in Software Engineering

Prereq.: 6.001

U (Spring)

3-9-3

Introduces concepts and techniques relevant
to the production of large software systems.
Students taught a programming method based
on the recognition and description of useful
abstractions. Topics: programming methodol-
Ogy; procedural, data, and control abstrac-
tions; specifications; design methods, and
testing. Several programming projects of vary-
ing size undertaken by students working singly
and in groups. 12 Engineering Design Points.
B. H. Liskov

6.182 Psychoacoustics Project Laboratory

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-4-5 Institute LAB

Introduces the methods used to measure

human auditory abilities. Discusses auditory
function, principles of psychoacoustic measure-
ment, models for psychoacoustic performance,
and experimental techniques. Project topics:
absolute and differential auditory sensitivity,
operating characteristics of human observers,
span of absolute judgment, adaptive measure-
ment procedures, scaling sensory magnitudes.
Oral presentation and written report.
Knowledge of probability helpful. Alternate
years. 12 Engineering Design Points.

L. D. Braida

6.190-6.194 Special Laboratory Subjects in
Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

6.195-6.198 Special Laboratory Subjects in

Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory subjects not offered in the regular

curriculum. Consult Department to learn of of-
ferings for a particular term. Registration by
permission of instructor.

A. C. Smith

6.199 Advanced Undergraduate Project

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
0-12-0

Research project for those students complet-

ing the S.B. degree; to be arranged by the stu-
dent and an appropriate MIT faculty member.
Students who register for this subject must con-
sult Department Undergraduate Office. Stu-
dents who are completing a project that was
originally started as 6.ThU must register under
that subject number.

A. C. Smith

Advanced Undergraduate
Subjects and Graduate
Subjects by Area

Systems Science and Control
Engineering

6.231 Dynamic Programming and
Stochastic Control

Prereq.: 6.041 or 18.313 or 18.440 or 18.100
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Sequential decision making via dynamic
programming. Unified approach to optimal con-
trol of stochastic dynamic systems and
Markovian decision problems. Applications in
linear-quadratic control, inventory control,
resource allocation models. Optimal decision
making under perfect and imperfect state infor-
mation. Certainty equivalent and open loop-
feedback control, self-tuning controllers.
Infinite horizon problems, successive ap-
proximation, policy iteration. Discounted
problems, stochastic shortest path problems,
average cost problems. Optimal stopping,
scheduling, and control of queues. Approxima-
tions and neurodynamic programming.

D. P. Bertsekas

6.241 Dynamic Systems and Control

Prereq.: 6.003, 18.06
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Linear, discrete- and continuous-time, multi-
input-output systems in control, related areas.
Least squares and matrix perturbation
problems. State-space models, modes,
stability, controllability, observability, transfer
function matrices, poles and zeros, minimality.
Internal stability of interconnected systems,
feedback compensators, state feedback, op-
timal regulation, observers, observer-based
compensators. Measures of control perfor-
mance, robustness issues using singular
values of transfer functions. Introductory ideas
on nonlinear systems. Recommended prereq-
uisite: 6.302.

M. A. Dahleh, G. C. Verghese

6.242 Advanced Linear Control
Systems

Prereq.: 18.06, 6.241

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Introduction to uncertain multivariable control
systems, modeling assumptions and objec-
tives. Stability of linear time invariant systems,
coprime factorization, parametrization of all
stabilizing compensators. Design using H2, Heo
L' -optimization. Stability and performance
robustness in the presence of structured uncer-
tainty. Special topics. Alternate years.

M. A. Dahleh

Descriptions of Subjects 353


--- 02.pdf Page 25 ---
School of Engineering

TT TT OO ——  — —— —— —— — ———  ———— — —  —————— ——————n——

6.243 Dynamics of Nonlinear Systems

(Same subject as 2.156J, 16.337J)
Prereq.: 18.100, 6.241

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to nonlinear deterministic dynami-

cal systems. Nonlinear ordinary differential
equations. Planar autonomous systems. Fun-
damental theory: Picard iteration, contraction
mapping theorem, Bellman-Gronwall lemma.
Stability of equilibria by Lyapunov’s first and
second methods. Feedback linearization. Ap-
plication to nonlinear circuits and control sys-
tems. Alternate years.

J. L. Wyatt, Jr., M. Dahleh, R. Ramnath,

N. Hogan

6.245 Multivariable Control Systems
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 6.241 or 16.31
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Computer-aided design methodologies for syn-

thesis of multivariable feedback control sys-
tems. Performance and robustness trade-offs.
Model-based compensators; separation
properties. Linear-quadratic and Kalman filter
designs. Integral control and other dynamic
augmentation. Linear-quadratic-gaussian com-
pensators; loop transfer recovery. Introduction
to H-ee design and mu-synthesis. Model and
compensator simplification. Nonlinear effects.
Computer-aided design homework using
models of physical processes.

M. Athans

6.251J Introduction to Mathematical
Programming

(Same subject as 15.081J)
Prereq.: 18.06

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to linear optimization and its exten-

sions emphasizing both methodology and the
underlying mathematical structures and
geometrical ideas. Covers classical theory of
linear programming as well as some recent ad-
vances in the field. Topics: simplex method;
duality theory; sensitivity analysis; network
flow problems; decomposition; integer
programming; interior point algorithms for
linear programming; introduction to com-
binatorical optimization and NP-completeness.
J. N. Tsitsiklis, D. Bertsimas

6.252J Nonlinear Programming

(Same subject as 15.084J)
Prereq.: 18.06, 18.100

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A unified analytical and computational ap-
proach to nonlinear optimization problems. Un-
constrained optimization methods include
gradient, conjugate direction, Newton, and
quasi-Newton methods. Constrained optimiza-
tion methods include feasible directions, projec-
tion, interior point, and Lagrange multiplier
methods. Convex analysis, Lagrangian relaxa-
tion, nondifferentiable optimization, and ap-
plications in integer programming.
Comprehensive treatment of duality theory. Ap-
plications drawn from control, communications,
power systems, and resource allocation
problems.

D. P. Bertsekas, J. F. Shapiro

6.262 Discrete Stochastic Processes
Prereq.: 6.041 or 6.431 or 18.313

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Review of probability and laws of large num-

bers; Poisson counting process and renewal
processes; Markov chains (including Markov
decision theory), branching processes, birth-
death processes, and semi-Markov processes;
continuous-time Markov chains and revers-
ibility; random walks, martingales, and large
deviations; applications from queueing, com-
munication, control, and operations research.
R. G. Gallager, R. C. Larson

6.263 Data-Communication Networks

Prereq.: 6.041 or 18.313
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Modeling of the control processes in conven-
tional and high-speed data communication net-
works, Develops and utilizes elementary
concepts from queueing theory, algorithms,
linear and nonlinear programming to study the
problems of line and network protocols, dis-
tributed algorithms, quasi-static and dynamic
routing, congestion control, deadlock preven-
tion. Treats local and wide-area networks, and
high-speed electronic and optical networks.

D. P. Bertsekas

6.281J Logistical and Transportation
Planning Methods

(Same subject as 1.203J, 11.526J, 13.665J,
15.073J, 16.76J)

Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.203J.
R. C. Larson, A. |. Barett, A. R. Odoni

6.291 Seminar in y
Communications, and Control Research

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

A seminar dealing with advanced topics in sys-
tems, communications, control, and signal
processing. Selected topics according to stu-
dent and instructor interest. See instructor for
specific topics to be offered in a particular term.
S. K. Mitter

Electronics, Computers, and
Systems

6.301 Solid-State Circuits

Prereq.: 6.012

G (Spring)

4-2-6

Analysis and design of transistor circuits,
based directly on the semiconductor physics
and transistor circuit models developed in
6.012. High-frequency and low-frequency
design calculations and simulation of multi-
stage transistor circuits. Trans-linear circuits.
The charge-control model. Introduction to
operational-amplifier design and application.
Some previous laboratory experience as-
sumed. 4 Engineering Design Points.

J. K. Roberge, H-S. Lee

6.302 Feedback Systems

Prereq.: 6.003 or 2.003 or 16.040
U (Fall)
4-2-6

Introduction to design of feedback systems.
Properties and advantages of feedback sys-
tems. Time-domain and frequency-domain per-
formance measures. Stability and degree of
stability. Nyquist criterion. Frequency-domain
design. Root locus method. Compensation
techniques. Application to a wide variety of
physical systems. Some previous laboratory
experience with electronic systems is assumed
(e.g., 6.002 or 6.071 or 16.040). 4 Engineering
Design Points.

J. K. Roberge

6.312 Acoustics

Prereq.: 6.002
U (Fall)
5-0-7

Sound generation and propagation in elastic
media. Simple sources and arrays of sources.
Derivation of lumped parameter acoustical ele-
ments and circuits from solutions of wave
equations. Radiation impedance. Conversion
among acoustical, electrical, and mechanical
energy. Modeling and analysis of electroacous-
tical devices such as microphones and
loudspeakers. Sound in rooms. Interaction of
sound and humans.

A. G. Bose

354 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 26 ---
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

6.313 Contemporary Computer Design

Prereq.: 6.004
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Computer arithmetic; high-speed logic design

and packaging; clocking strategies; pipelined
computer techniques; microprogramming vs
simple instruction sets; cache and paging
design; datatyping, hardware support for gar-
bage collection; MIMD/SIMD parallel com-
puters; interprocessor communications
technologies. 2 Engineering Design Points.
T. F. Knight, Jr.

6.331 Advanced Circuit Techniques

Prereq.: 6.301, 6.302

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Following a brief classroom discussion of

relevant principles, each student completes

the paper design of several advanced circuits
such as multiplexers, sample-and-holds, gain-
controlled amplifiers, analog multipliers, digital-
to-analog or analog-to-digital converters, and
power amplifiers. One of each student's
designs may be presented to the class, and
one may be built and evaluated. Associated
laboratory emphasizing the use of modern
analog building blocks. Enrollment limited. Per-
mission of instructor required. Alternate years.
12 Engineering Design Points.

J. K. Roberge

6.333 Electronic Circuits

Prereq.: 6.003, 6.012

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Design, analysis, and simulation of linear and

nonlinear circuits including application of circuit
methods to modeling and analysis of physical
systems. Topics; direct, recursive, and iterative
analysis of lumped and distributed circuits;
computer modeling and simulation of
electromagnetic fields and forces; analog and
digital signal processing; power electronic sys-
tems; feedback control of nonlinear and un-
stable systems; oscillatory and chaotic circuits;
sensitivity and noise. Emphasis on developing
circuit intuition. Alternate years.

R. D. Thornton

6.334 Power Electronics

Prereq.: 6.012, 6.013
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The application of electronics to energy conver-

sion and control; phase-controlled rectifier/in-
verter circuits, dc/de converters, high

frequency inverters, and motion control sys-
tems. Characteristics of power semiconductor
devices: diodes, bipolar and field effect transis-
tors, and thyristors. Modeling, analysis, and
Numerous application examples.

J. G. Kassakian, M. F. Schlecht

6.335 Fundamental Theory of Nonlinear
Networks

Prereq.: 6.011, 6.012
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Rigorous basis for circuit theory and relation to

engineering intuition. Network topology: graph
theory, Tellegen’s theorem, colored branch
theorem. Linear networks: impedance match-
ing, reciprocity, natural frequencies, sensitivity
to element values. Nonlinear resistive net-
works: linearization, passivity, reciprocity, Gil-
bert translinear principle. Nonlinear dynamic
networks: phase-plane analysis, nonlinear dif-
ferential equations, multiple time scales. Ap-
plication to analog circuits for machine vision.
Alternate years.

J. L. Wyatt, Jr.

6.336J Introduction to Numerical
Algorithms

(Same subject as 18.338J)

Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06 or equivalents
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to theoretical and practical
aspects of numerical algorithms, emphasizing
broadly applicable techniques. Application ex-
amples: problems in circuit analysis; electros-
tatics; mechanical elastostatics. Topics:
equation formulation approaches; linear sys-
tem solution by sparse direct factorization; non-
linear equation solution; Newton's method;
issues of A-stability; local and global error
analysis; solution of elliptic differential and in-
tegral equations; FFT and multipole-ac-
celerated algorithms, more. Alternate years.
J. K. White, A. Edelman

6.337J Numerical Methods of Applied
Mathematics |
(New)

(Same subject as 18.335J)
Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

|EEE-standard, iterative and direct linear sys-

tem solution methods, eigendecomposition
and model-order reduction, fast Fourier trans-
forms, multigrid, wavelets and other multi-
resolution methods, matrix sparsification.

J. K. White, A. Edelman

6.338J Parallel Scientific Computing
(New)

(Same subject as 18.337J)
Prereq.: 18.06 or equivalent
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced interdisciplinary introduction to

modern scientific computing on parallel super-
computers. Numerical topics include dense
and sparse linear algebra, N-body problems,
and Fourier transforms. Geometrical topics in-
clude partitioning and mesh generation. Other
topics include architectures and software sys-
tems with hands-on emphasis on under-
standing the realities and myths of what is
possible on the world's fastest machines.

J. K. White, A. Edelman

6.341 Discrete-Time Signal Processing

Prereq.: 6.011; 18.075 or 18.04
G (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Representation, analysis, and design of dis-
crete time signals and systems. Review of Z-
transforms, discrete-time Fourier transforms,
difference equations. All-pass and minimum
phase systems. Effects of group delay. DT
processing of continuous-time signals. Decima-
tion and interpolation. Flowgraph structures for
DT systems. Time- and frequency-domain
design techniques for recursive (IIR) and non-
recursive (FIR) filters, discrete Fourier trans-
form, FFT algorithm, Hilbert transforms,
various applications.

A. V. Oppenheim

6.343 Digital Speech Processing

Prereq.: 6.341

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application of digital signal processing to
speech signals. Acoustic theories of speech
production leading to time- and frequency-
domain models. Speech analysis-synthesis
techniques based on the spectrogram, linear
prediction, homomorphic, filter bank, and
sinusoidal representations. Speech coding
using scalar and vector quantization. Time-
scale and pitch modification; speech restora-
tion; speaker separation. Pitch estimation;
frequency modulation models; constant-Q
analysis. Application to music analysis-syn-
thesis. Alternate years.

T. F. Quatieri

6.344 Two-Dimensional Signal and
Image Processing

Prereq.: 6.341
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Representation, analysis, and design of two-
dimensional signals and systems. Two-dimen-
sional Fourier transform, z-transform, discrete
Fourier transform, and fast Fourier transform
algorithms. Image processing basics. Image
enhancement. Image restoration. Image
coding. Advanced television systems.

J. S. Lim

6.345 Automatic Speech Recognition

Prereq.: 6.341; 6.041 or 6.431
G (Spring)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Graduate-level introduction to automatic
speech recognition. Provides relevant back-
ground in acoustic theory of speech produc-
tion, properties of speech sounds, signal
representation, acoustic modeling, pattern clas-
sification, search algorithms, stochastic model-
ing techniques (including hidden Markov
modeling), and language modeling. Examines
approaches of state-of-the-art speech recogni-
tion systems. Enrollment limited. Alternate
years. 4 Engineering Design Points.

V. W. 2ue, J. R. Glass

Descriptions of Subjects 355


--- 02.pdf Page 27 ---
School of Engineering

-_eoeo

6.371 Introduction to VLSI Systems
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-6-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides background in integrated devices, cir-

cuits, and digital subsystems needed for
design and implementation of integrated sys-
tems. Design methodology, use of ratioed
design rules and library modules, symbolic
layout languages, computer-aided design tech-
niques. Students required to complete,
through layout, the design of a digital subsys-
tem in NMOS or CMOS. Selected projects
form a multi-project chip set, leading to wafers
available after the end of the term for packag-
ing and testing by the student. Limited enroll-
ment. 8 Engineering Design Points.

J. Allen

6.372 Design and Analysis of VLSI
Circuits

Prereq.: 6.371

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

MOS device parameters, design rules, and

fabrication from a circuit design perspective.
Physics of devices and interconnect. Noise
margins, worst-case design. Circuit design of
high-speed gates. Analog aspects of digital
design. Clocking. System level issues in VLSI
design. Alternate years. 2 Engineering Design
Points.

T. F. Knight, Jr.

6.373 Computer-Aided Design of Integrated
Circuits

Prereq.: 6.004

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theoretical, algorithmic, and practical aspects

of the development of computer-aided design
tools for VLSI design. Automated synthesis at
the logic, layout, and architectural levels. Test-
ing of VLSI circuits, formal verification and
design-for-testability methods, and interaction
between synthesis and testability of VLSI sys-
tems. Alternate years. 2 Engineering Design
Points.

S. Devadas

6.374 Analysis and Design of Digital
Integrated Circuits
(New)

Prereq.: 6.012 or 6.371
G (Fall)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Device and circuit level optimization of digital

building blocks. MOS and bipolar device and
parasitic models and second order effects. Cir-
cuit design styles and arithmetic structures. Es-
timation and minimization of energy
consumption. Interconnect models and
parasitics; driver design; timing issues (clock
skew, self-timed circuits, etc.). Memory ar-
chitectures, circuits (sense amplifiers) and
devices. Extensive use of circuit layout and
SPICE in design projects and software labs. 4
Engineering Design Points.

A. P. Chandrakasan

356 Chapter Vill

Probabilistic Systems and
Communication

6.430J Engineering Probability and
Statistics

(Same subject as 3.81J, 15.064J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Modeling and analysis of uncertainty. Random

variables, transforms, simple random proces-
ses and their probability laws. Probability as-
sessment and decision analysis. Limit
theorems. Introduction to experimental design.
Regression and basic statistical procedures
pertinent to manufacturing and quality control.
Primarily intended for students in the Leaders
for Manufacturing Program; others may con-
sult instructor.

A. W. Drake

6.431 Applied Probability

(Subject meets with 6.041)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8

Meets with undergraduate subject 6.041. Re-

quires the completion of additional advanced
home problems. See description under subject
6.041.

A. W. Drake

6.432 Stochastic Processes, Detection, and
Estimation

Prereq.: 6.011; 18.06

G (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of detection and estimation for

signal processing, communications, and con-
trol. Vector spaces of random variables.
Bayesian and Neyman-Pearson hypothesis
testing. Bayesian and nonrandom parameter
estimation. Minimum-variance unbiased es-
timators and the Cramer-Rao bounds. Repre-
sentations for stochastic processes; shaping
and whitening filters; Karhunen-Loeve expan-
sions. Detection and estimation from
waveform observations. Advanced topics;
linear prediction and spectral estimation;
Wiener and Kalman filters.

A. S. Willsky, G. W. Wornell

6.433 Recursive Estimation
Prereq.: 6.241, 6.432

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

State-space based theory of dynamic estima-

tion in discrete and continuous time. Linear
state-space models driven by white noise. Kal-
man filter and its properties. Implementation is-
sues, including the solution of the Riccati
equation, the square-root filter, and efficient al-
gorithms for the Kalman gain. Optimal smooth-
ing for linear systems. Nonlinear filtering and
the extended and second-order Kalman filters.
A. S. Willsky

6.435 System Identification

Prereq.: 6.241, 6.432

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mathematical models of systems from observa-
tions of their behavior. Time series, state-
space, input-output models. Model structures,
parametrization, identifiability. Non-parametric
methods. Prediction error methods for
parameter estimation, convergence, consisten-
cy, asymptotic distribution. Relations to maxi-
mum likelihood estimation. Recursive
estimation; relation to Kalman filters; structure
determination; order estimation; Akaike
criterion; bounded but unknown noise models.
Robustness, practical issues. Alternate years.
M. A. Dahleh, S. K. Mitter

6.441 Transmission of Information

Prereq.: 6.262 or 6.432 or 6.431
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the quantitative theory of infor-
mation and its applications to reliable, efficient
communication systems. Mathematical defini-
tion and properties of information. The source
coding theorem. Lossless compression of
data, including adaptive compression for un-
known source statistics. Noisy communication
channels, the data processing theorem, and
fundamental limits on decoding error. Introduc-
tion to algebraic and convolutional error correc-
tion coding techniques.

R. G. Gallager, M. D. Trott

6.451 Principles of Communication

Prereq.: 6.011
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental principles underlying the digital
transmission of information over linear Gaus-
sian channels. Nyquist theory; modulation; sig-
nal space concepts; optimum detection; signal
set design; introduction to coding for Euclidean-
space channel; the Viterbi algorithm; intersym-
bol interference and adaptive equalization;
equalization via precoding; approaching chan-
nel capacity of linear Gaussian channels. Cur-
rent topics.

R. G. Gallager

6.455J Sonar, Radar and Seismic Signal
Processing!

(Same subject as 13.741J, 12.518J)

Prereq.: 2.02 or 2.003 or 6.003, 6.041, 18.075
or 18.085

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.741J.
A. B. Baggeroer, J. R. Fricke

6.456J Sonar, Radar and Seismic Signal
Processing Il

(Same subject as 13.742J, 12.519J)
Prereq.: 13.741J

G (Spring)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.742J.
A. B. Baggeroer, J. R. Fricke


--- 02.pdf Page 28 ---
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

Bioelectrical Engineering

6.501 Sound, Speech, Hearing

Prereq.: 6.003

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Introduces the physical, physiological, and

psychological bases of auditory communica-
tion. Sound propagation in tubes, sound radia-
tion, properties of neural and muscular
elements, the vocal tract and speech genera-
tion, signal transmission in the auditory sys-
tem, perception of attributes of speech and
speechlike sounds, and the linguistic units that
underlie speech events. Disorders of human
communication. Alternate years.

K. N. Stevens, L. D. Braida

6.521J Quantitative Physiology: Cells and
Tissues

(Subject meets with 6.021J, 2.791J, 2.794J,

HST.541J)

Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.002 or 6.071 or 10.301;
8.02, 18.03

G (Fall)

5-2-5

Meets with undergraduate subject 6.021J. Re-

quires the completion of more advanced home
problems and/or an additional project. See
description under subject 6.021J.

T. F. Weiss, D. M. Freeman

6.522J Quantitative Physiology: Organ
Transport Systems

(Subject meets with 6.022J, 2.792J, 2.7964,

HST.542J)

Prereq.: 2.006 or 6.013; 6.021J
G (Spring)

4-2-6

Meets with undergraduate subject 6.022J. Re-

quires the completion of more advanced home
problems and/or an additional project. See
description under subject 6.022J. See descrip-
tion under subject 6.022J.

R. G. Mark, R. Kamm

6.541J Speech Communication

(Same subject as 24.968J, HST.710J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of structural properties of natural lan-
guages, with special emphasis on the sound
pattern. Physiology of speech production, ar-
ticulatory phonetics. Acoustical theory of
speech production; acoustical and articulatory
descriptions of phonetic features. Perception
of speech: the auditory capabilities of humans;
evidence for perceptual correlates of phonetic
categories. Applications to recognition and
generation of speech by machine. Recom-
mended prerequisite: mathematical back-
ground equivalent to 6.003.

K. N. Stevens, S. J. Keyser

6.542J Laboratory on the Physiology,

Acoustics, and Perception of Speech

(Same subject as 24.966J, HST.712J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

2-2-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Experimental investigations of speech proces-

ses. Topics: a) measurement of articulatory
movements, b) measurements of pressure and
volume velocity, c) computer-aided waveform
analysis and spectral analysis of speech, d)
synthesis of speech, e) perception and dis-
crimination of speechlike sounds, f) speech
prosody, g) hidden Markov models for speech
recognition, and other topics. Recommended
prerequisites: 6.501, 6.002 or 18.03. Alternate
years. 4 Engineering Design Points.

K. N. Stevens, J. S. Perkell, S. Shattuck-
Hufnagel

6.551J Acoustics of Speech and Hearing

(Same subject as HST.714J)

Prereq.: 8.03 and 6.003 or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall)

4-2-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Electric-acoustic analogies. Review of basic

ideas of circuit theory; natural frequencies, two-
ports, reciprocity, energy, and power. Laws of
acoustics. Waves in one dimension. Acoustic
impedance. Natural frequencies in tubes.
Lumped approximations. Losses, non-uniform
plane waves, horns. Room acoustics. Sound
sources and microphones. Concepts applied
to speech production and hearing.
Laboratories demonstrate measurement
methods, data presentation, and tests of
theory. 4 Engineering Design Points.

W. T. Peake, J. J. Rosowski,

W. M. Rabinowitz, K. N. Stevens

6.552J Signal Processing by the Auditory
System: Perception

(Same subject as HST.716J)

Prereq.: 6.003; 6.041 or 6.431 and permission
of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies behavioral aspects of human hearing

in relation to current physiological knowledge.
Examines performance in processing informa-
tion from acoustic stimuli. Correlations be-
tween behavior and physiology, reflecting the
tono-topic organization and stochastic respon-
ses of the auditory system. Mathematical
models of psychophysical relations, incorporat-
ing quantitative knowledge of physiological
transformations by the peripheral auditory sys-
tem. Discusses related research on diagnosis
and aids for partially deaf.

L. D. Braida

6.555J Biomedical Signal and image
Processing

(Same subject as HST.582J, 16.456J)
Prereq.: 6.003 or 2.003 or 18.085

G (Spring)

3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject HST.582J.

L. D. Braida, B. Delgutte, A. Dobrzeniecki,
J. Greenberg

6.561J Fields, Forces, and Flows:
Background for Physiology

(Same subject as 2.795J, HST.544J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Conduction, diffusion, convection in
electrolytes; fields in heterogeneous media;
electrical double layers; Maxwell stress tensor
and electrical forces in physiological systems.
Fluid and solid continua: equations of motion
useful for porous, hydrated biological tissues.
Case studies: membrane transport; electrode
interfaces; electrical, mechanical, and chemi-
cal transduction in tissues; electrophoretic,
electroosmotic flows; diffusion/reaction; ECG.
Electromechanical and physicochemical inter-
actions in biomaterials and cells; orthopaedic,
cardiovascular, and other clinical examples.
A. J. Grodzinsky

6.566J Biosensors, Signal Processing, and
Biomedical Applications

(Same subject as HST.585J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Alternate years. 6 Engineering Design Points.
See description under subject HST.585J.
S. K. Burns, J. C. Weaver

Electrodynamics

6.601 Fields, Forces, and Motion

Prereq.: 6.013
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Electromechanical interactions in lumped-
parameter and continuum systems. Integral
and differential electromagnetic laws, including
motion. Lumped electrical and mechanical ele-
ments: thermodynamics of discrete
electromechanical coupling, equations of mo-
tion. Synchronous and induction rotating
machines. Linear and nonlinear transducers,
transient and steady-state dynamics;
electromechanical time constants. Field trans-
formations, de rotating machines, magnetic dif-
fusion and charge relaxation in moving
conductors. Electromagnetic force densities
and stress tensors.

J. H,. Lang

Descriptions of Subjects 357


--- 02.pdf Page 29 ---
School of Engineering

rer — ee — — — — — —  _

6.630 Electromagnetic Waves
Prereq.: 8.02 or 6.013 or 6.014
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introductory subject on electromagnetic

waves. Topics: polarization, Stokes
parameters, Poincaré sphere, gyrotropic
media, uniaxial media, phase matching,
layered media, dielectric waveguides, metallic
waveguides and resonators, Cerenkov radia-
tion, Hertzian dipole, equivalence principle,
and reciprocity. Examples deal with propaga-
tion, guidance, and radiation of electromag-
netic waves.

J. A. Kong

6.631 Optics and Optical Electronics

Prereq.: 6.014 or 8.07
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A first-year graduate subject on fundamental

concepts and techniques of modern optics and
quantum electronics. Review of Maxwell's
equations and the vector properties of light. In-
terference and interferometers. Temporal and
spatial coherence. Scalar diffraction theory.
Propagation of spherical and Gaussian-spheri-
cal beams. Thin film and “fiber” waveguides.
Device applications of electrooptic effect and
nonlinear optics.

J. G. Fujimoto

6.632 Electromagnetic Wave Theory

Prereq.: 6.013 or 6.014 or 6.630
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A first-year graduate subject on electromag-

netic wave theory, emphasizing mathematical
approaches, problem solving, and physical in-
terpretation. Topics include equivalence prin-
ciple, duality and complementarity, Huygens’
principle, Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction,
random media, effective permittivities, dyadic
Green's functions, Lorentz transformation,
Maxwell-Minkowski theory. Examples deal with
limiting cases of Maxwell's theory and diffrac-
tion and scattering of electromagnetic waves.
Alternate years.

J. A. Kong

6.633 Electrodynamics of Waves, Media,
and Interactions

Prereq.: 6.014 or 8.07; 18.04 or 18.075
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Wave propagation in media with temporal and

spatial dispersion; pulse propagation and
Green's function analysis. Linear stability
theory; absolute and convective instabilities.
Energy, momentum, and their flows as-
sociated with small-amplitude wave propaga-
tion in passive and active media. Geometric
optics and mode conversion in in-
homogeneous media. Linear and nonlinear
coupling of modes in stable and unstable sys-
tems. Nonlinear dynamics of order and chaos;
solitons and intrinsic stochasticity. Alternate
years.

A. Bers

6.634 Nonlinear Optics
Prereq.: 6.014, 6.017

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Nonlinear optical phenomena, emphasizing ap-

plications, techniques, and devices. Nonlinear
polarization: harmonic generation, frequency
conversion, optical Kerr effect, self-phase
modulation, wavefront conjugation. Pulse
propagation in nonlinear media. Applications
to fiber optics. Nonlinear laser spectroscopy.
Picosecond and femtosecond measurement
techniques.

E. P. Ippen, J. G. Fujimoto

6.635 Topics in Electromagnetism
Prereq.: 6.014 or 6.630 or 8.07

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Material covered differs from year to year ac-

cording to interest of students and instructor in
charge. Typical topics include electrodynamics
of moving media, waves in dispersive media,
microstrip integrated circuits, quantum optics,
remote sensing, radiative transfer theory and
random media.

J. A. Kong

6.637 Optical Information Processing

Prereq.: 6.003, 6.014

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Systems, algorithms, devices, and applications

for optical information processing. Topics:
coherent and incoherent optical processors;
space-and-time-integrating correlators; space-
variant processors; white-light processors; digi-
tal optical processors; matrix-algebraic
processors; symbolic optical processors; opti-
cal neural networks; adaptive optics; acous-
tooptic, electrooptic, and photorefractive
spatial light modulators; limitations of optical
computers. Alternate years.

C. Warde

6.641 Microwave Circuits

Prereq.: 6.014

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Electromagnetic wave propagation on uniform

and periodic structures, waveguide, stripline,
and microstrip. Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW)
and magnetic resonance devices. Equivalent
circuit representations for apertures and
obstacles. Multiport junctions. Non-reciprocal
ferrite devices. Cavity and solid state
resonators; filters. Perturbation theory. Alter-
nate years.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.651J Introduction to Plasma
Physics |

(Same subject as 8.613J, 22.611J)
Prereq.: 6.014 or 8.07; 18.04 or 18.075
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 8.613J.
A. Bers, B. Coppi

6.652J Introduction to Plasma
Physics Il

(Same subject as 8.614J, 22.612J)
Prereq.: 6.651J or 8.613J or 22.611J
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 8.614J.
P. Catto

6.661 Receivers, Antennas, and Signals
Prereq.: 6.014 or 8.03, 6.003 or 16.040 or
2.004

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Detection and measurement of radio and opti-
cal signals encountered in communications,
astronomy, remote sensing, instrumentation,
and radar. Statistical analysis of signal
processing systems, including radiometers,
spectrometers, interferometers, and digital cor-
relation systems. Matched filters and ambiguity
functions. Communications channel perfor-
mance. Measurement of random electromag-
netic fields. Angular filtering properties of
antennas, interferometers, and aperture syn-
thesis systems. Radiative transfer and
parameter estimation. Alternate years.

D.H. Staelin

6.671 Continuum Electromechanics |

Prereq.: 6.013

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quasistatic electric and magnetic field
dynamics. Transfer relations as an approach

to field descriptions. Electromagnetic forces,
force densities, and stress tensors, including
magnetization and polarization. Classification
of energy-conversion processes. Charge
migration and relaxation, and magnetic dif-
fusion and induction interactions with material
motion. Introduction to electromechanics of
fluids and solids. Temporal and spatial modes.
Spectral numerical techniques. Method of char-
acteristics. Varied applications. Alternate years.
M. Zahn

6.672 Continuum Electromechanics Il

Prereq.: 6.671

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Laws, approximations, and relations of con-
tinuum mechanics. Mechanical and
electromechanical transfer relations. Statics
and dynamics of electromechanical systems
having a static equilibrium. Electromechanical
flows. Field coupling with thermal and
molecular diffusion. Electrokinetics. Streaming
interactions. Applications to materials process-
ing, magnetohydrodynamic and
electrohydrodynamic pumps and generators,
physiochemical systems, heat transfer, con-
tinuum feedback control, electron beam
devices, and plasma dynamics. Emphasis on
microfabricated systems. Alternate years.

M. Zahn

358 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 30 ---
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

6.673 Introduction to Numerical Simulation
in Electrical Engineering

Prereq.: 6.012 or 6.013

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of a simulation model and physical

approximations. Solution of nonlinear coupled
PDEs in 1-D through finite difference and finite
element methods, Newton's method, and
variants. Finite difference and finite element
methods in 2-D and sparse matrix methods
emphasizing conjugate gradient algorithms.
Semiconductor devices used as primary ex-
amples; additional examples drawn from E&M
modeling, nonlinear pulse propagation, and
laser physics. Alternate years.

P. L. Hagelstein

6.683J Operation and Planning of Electric
Power

(Same subject as TPP.61J)
Prereq.: 6.061 or 6.013; 15.011
Acad Year 1996-97: Not cffered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focus on worldwide changes in power sys-

tems from generation technology to network
operation, including significant customer and
private generation. Topics include evaluation
of new technologies in system control; conser-
vation and load management; supply; system
economics; rate setting; deregulation; cus-
tomer response to new rates. Electrical and
economic analysis of power transfers: wheel-
ing. Alternate years.

M. D. Ilic, R. D. Tabors

6.685 Electric Machines

Prereq.: 6.013 and permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Treatment of transformers, electromechanical

transducers, rotating and linear electric
machines. Lumped-parameter
electromechanics of interaction. Consideration
of the basic machine types: de, induction,
synchronous. Development of device charac-
teristics: energy conversion density, efficiency;
and of system interaction characteristics:
regulation, stability, controllability, and
response. Problems taken from current re-
search. Alternate years.

J. L. Kirtley, Jr.

6.686 Advanced Power Systems |

Prereq.: 6.002 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic components of power systems and func-

tion in interconnected systems: fast dynamics
(synchronous generators and their voltage
regulation); slow-speed dynamics (turbines
and their governor control); networks and con-
sumers; long-term dynamics (boilers, nuclear
reactors, and local control). Principles of real-
time monitoring and control of the intercon-
nected system: automatic generation control
and reactive flow control. Leads to research
opportunities. Recommended corequisite:
6.241. Alternate years.

M. D. llic

6.688J Strategic Analysis for
Environmental Policy Planning, Design,
and Implementation

(Same subject as 1.141J, 3.563J, 11.385J,

22.822J, TPP.121J)

Prereq.: 1.146 or 2.192 or 3.56 or 13.62 or
16.861 or TPP.21 or 11.200 or 11.205

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.141J.

D. H. Marks, R. de Neutville, J. Clark,

R. Gakenheimer, M. W. Golay, D. Sadoway,
R. D. Tabors

6.689 Seminar on Power System Modeling,
Dynamics, and Control
(New)

Prereq.: 6.241 or permission of instructor

G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on advanced topics in power sys-

tems. Content varies by semester. Possible
topics: control and coordination of large-scale
electric power systems with physical and
economic constraints imposed by a competi-
tive industry; estimation and control of electri-
cal machine systems; application of
techniques for nonlinear system analysis to
study dynamics occurring in electrical energy
systems. See instructor for details concerning
material for a particular semester.

M. D. Ilic, B. C. Lesieutre, G. C. Verghese

Solid-State Materials and Devices

6.720 Integrated Microelectronic Devices

Prereq.: 6.012 or equivalent
G (Fall)
4-0-8

The physics of semiconductor devices for
silicon integrated circuit applications. Topics:
semiconductor fundamentals, p-n junction,
metal-oxide semiconductor structure, metal-
semiconductor junction, MOS field-effect tran-
sistor, and bipolar junction transistor.
Emphasis on building professional device
models and developing physical intuition
through the use of energy band diagrams.
First- and second-order effects discussed. Is-
sues in modern device scaling outlined. 2 En-
gineering Design points.

J. A. del Alamo

6.728 Applied Quantum and Statistical
Physics
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 6.003, 18.06
G (Fall)
4-0-8

Elementary quantum mechanics and statistical
physics. Introduces applied quantum physics.
Emphasizes experimental basis for quantum
mechanics. Applies Schrodinger’s equation to
the free particle, tunneling, the harmonic oscil-
lator, and hydrogen atom. Variational
methods. Elementary statistical physics; Fermi-
Dirac, Bose-Einstein, and Boltzmann distribu-
tion functions. Simple models for metals,
semiconductors, and devices such as electron
microscopes, scanning tunneling microscope,
thermonic emitters, atomic force microscope,
more.

S. D. Senturia, P. L. Hagelstein

6.730 Physics for Solid-State
Applications

Prereq.: 6.013 or 6.014, 6.728
G (Spring)
5-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Classical and quantum models of electrons
and lattice vibrations in solids, emphasizing
physical models for electronic transport and
heat capacity. Crystal lattices, energy band
structures in 3D, calculation of 1D and 2D
band structures, effective mass theorem, semi-
classical equations of motion, and impurity
states in semiconductors. Band structure and
transport properties of selected semiconduc-
tors. Connection of quantum theory of solids
with quasifermi levels and Boltzmann transport
used in device modeling.

T. P. Orlando, S. D. Senturia

Descriptions of Subjects 359


--- 02.pdf Page 31 ---
School of Engineering

6.732 Physics of Solids

Prereq.: 6.730 or 8.231
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of 6.730 emphasizing applica-

tions-related physical issues in solids. Topics:
electronic structure and energy band diagrams
of semiconductors, metals, and insulators;
Fermi surfaces; dynamics of electrons; classi-
cal diffusive transport phenomena such as
electrical and thermal conduction and ther-
moelectric phenomena; quantum transport in
tunnel ballistic devices; optical properties of
metals, semiconductors, and insulators;
photon-lattice interactions; magnetic properties
of solids; magneto-oscillatory phenomena;
quantum Hall effect; superconducting
phenomena and simple models.

Q. Hu, M. S. Dresselhaus

6.734J Application of Group Theory to the
Physics of Solids

(Same subject as 8.510J)
Prereq.: 6.732 or 8.231

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Group theory techniques: mathematical back-

ground, representation theory, character
tables, basis functions, point groups, space
groups, double groups, time reversal sym-
metry. Applications: crystal field structure,
selection rules, directed valence and bonds,
molecular vibrations, group of the wave vector
with application to energy bands, lattice
modes. Alternate years.

M. S. Dresselhaus

6.735J Modern Topics in Solid State
Physics

(Same subject as 8.532J)
Prereq.: 6.732 or 8.231

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Alternate years. See description under subject

8.532J.
M. S. Dresselhaus

6.751 Quantum Electronics

Prereq.: 6.728 or 8.05

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The quantum theory of light. Basic phenomena

of quantum electronics, including development
of background quantum mechanics and optical
properties of solids. Quantization of
electromagnetic field and spontaneous plus
stimulated optical transitions between energy
levels. Resonant processes: electric dipole
transitions, absorption, dispersion, saturation.
Photon optics and counting. Coherence. The
laser and its operating characteristics. Rate
equations, optical pumping, Q-switching, mode
locking. Resonance fluorescence, light scatter-
ing. Alternate years.

G. W. Pratt, Jr.

360 Chapter Vill

6.763 Applied Superconductivity

Prereq.: 6.013 or 8.07

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Phenomenological approach to superconduc-

tivity, surveying large-scale and small-scale
applications. Electrodynamics of superconduc-
tors, London's model, flux quantization. Type I!
superconductors, upper critical fields, pinning,
Critical state model. Josephson Junctions and
superconducting quantum devices, equivalent
circuits and analogs, computers. Brief over-
view of superconducting materials and micro-
scopic theory. Some background in solid-state
physics helpful. Alternate years.

T. P. Orlando

6.772 Compound Semiconductor Devices

Prereq.: 6.720, 6.730

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Physics, modeling, application, and tec!

of compound semiconductors (primarily Ill-Vs)
in electronic, optoelectronic, and photonic
devices and integrated circuits. Topics: proper-
ties, preparation, and processing of compound
semiconductors; theory and practice of
heterojunctions, quantum structures, and pseu-
domorphic strained layers; metal-semiconduc-
tor field effect transistors (MESFETs);
heterojunction field effect transistors (HFETs)
and bipolar transistors (HBTs); and op-
toelectronic devices. Alternate years.

C. G. Fonstad, Jr.

6.774 Physics of Microelectronic
Fabrication

Prereq.: 6.152J or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental principles of the processes used

in the fabrication of silicon monolithic in-
tegrated circuits. Physical models of bulk crys-
tal growth, thermal oxidation, solid-state
diffusion, ion implantation, epitaxial deposition,
chemical vapor deposition, and physical vapor
deposition. Refractory metal silicides, plasma
and reactive ion etching, rapid thermal process-
ing. Process modeling and simulation. Tech-
nological limitations on integrated circuit
design and fabrication. VLSI fundamentals.

L. R. Reif

6.775 Design of Analog MOS LSI

Prereq.: 6.301
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A detailed exposition of the principles involved
in designing analog circuits in MOS LSI.
Device physics, small signal and large signal
models. Biasing. Basic circuit building blocks.
Operational amplifier design. Large signal con-
siderations. Principles of switched capacitor
networks. Applications: fully integrated filters,
comparators, A/D and D/A converters, other
signal processing circuits. A comprehensive
design project is a required part of the subject.
4 Engineering Design Points.

H. S. Lee, C. G. Sodini

6.776J Plasma Processing in Integrated
Circuit Fabrication

(Same subject as 10.582J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies glow discharge properties and proces-
ses as applied to integrated circuit fabrication.
The physics and chemistry of nonequilibrium
plasmas. Emphasizes the plasma kinetics and
plasma-surface interactions. Extensively
reviews plasma etching processes, sputter
deposition, and plasma enhanced chemical
vapor deposition for the fabrication of VLSI
devices. Alternate years.

L. R. Reif, H. H. Sawin

6.781 Submicrometer and Nanometer
Technology

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys techniques to fabricate and analyze
submicrometer and nanometer structures, with
applications. Reviews optical and electron
microscopy. Surface characterization, prepara-
tion, and measurement techniques. Resist
technology. Optical projection, holographic, X-
ray, ion, and electron lithography. Aqueous,
ion, and plasma etching techniques. Lift-off
and electroplating. lon implantation. Applica-
tions in microelectronics, optoelectronics, and
quantum-effect electronics. Undergraduates
with permission of instructor.

H. |. Smith

6.791 Special Topics in the Solid State and
Its Application

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

6.792 Special Topics in the Solid State and
Its Application

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Primarily for those interested in research on
solid-state materials and devices for electrical
and electronic applications. Topics and staff to
be announced each term. Given independently
or sequentially as circumstances require.

F. R. Morgenthaler


--- 02.pdf Page 32 ---
Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

Computer Science

6.801 Machine Vision

Prereq.: 6.003 or permission of instructor

U (Fall)
3-0-9

Deriving a symbolic description of the environ-

ment from an image. Understanding physics of
image formation. Image analysis as an inver-
sion problem. Binary image processing and fil-
tering of images as preprocessing steps.
Recovering shape, lightness, orientation, and
motion. Using constraints to reduce the am-
biguity. Photometric stereo and extended
Gaussian sphere. Applications to robotics; in-
telligent interaction of machines with their en-
vironment.

B. K. P. Horm

6.805J Ethics and the Law on the Electronic
Frontier

(Same subject as STS.085J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Studies the growth of computer and com-

munications technology and the new legal and
ethical challenges that reflect tensions be-
tween individual rights and societal needs.
Topics: computer crime; intellectual property
restrictions on software; encryption, privacy,
and national security; academic freedom and
free speech. Students meet and question tech-
nologists, activists, law enforcement agents,
journalists, and legal experts. Extensive use of
World Wide Web for readings and other
materials. Enrollment limited.

H. Abelson, M. Fischer

6.821 Programming Languages
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of functional, imperative, and logic

programming languages. Meta-circular inter-
preters, semantics (operational and denotation-
al), type systems (polymorphism, inference,
and abstract types), object oriented program-
ming, modules, multiprocessing. Case studies
of contemporary programming languages.
Programming experience and background in
language implementation required.

D. K. Gifford

6.823 Computer System Architecture

Prereq.: 6.004 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasizes the relationship among technol-

ogy, hardware organization, and programming
systems in the evolution of computer architec-
ture. Technology constraints, machine or-
ganization, instruction set architecture, I/O and
memory system design, addressing structures
and memory management, and their impact on
performance and programmability; design and
programming of pipelined processors, vector
processors, and parallel computers. Assumes
an undergraduate knowledge of computer sys-
tems. 4 Engineering Design Points.

Arvind, W. J. Dally

6.826 Principles of Computer Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to the basic principles of com-

puter systems with emphasis on the use of
rigorous techniques as an aid to under-
standing and building modern computing sys-
tems. Particular attention paid to concurrent
and distributed systems, Topics include
specification and verification, concurrent algo-
rithms, synchronization mechanisms, naming,
communication protocols, replication techni-
ques (including distributed cache manage-
ment), and principles and algorithms for
achieving reliability.

W. E. Weihl

6.835 Concurrent Systems for Artificial
Intelligence

Prereq.: 6.001, 6.034

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concurrent systems and their relationship to ar-

tificial intelligence. Organizations as exemplars
of highly intelligent parallel systems. Concur-
rent architectures for artificial intelligence (e.g.,
Apiary, Connection Machine, and parallel
Prolog machines). Incrementally evolving net-
works of computers. Mathematical models of
concurrent systems (e.g., Actor Model,
Milner’s algebraic model, and Hoare’s process
model). Alternate years.

C. E. Hewitt

6.836 Embodied Intelligence
(New)

Prereq.: 6.034, 18.03, 18.06
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies how to build intelligent systems that
have physical embodiment. Examines specific
problems, historical solutions, and contem-
porary research into the area of autonomous
embodied systems. Topics: dynamical model-
ing of agent/environment interaction; neural
modeling of perception and action systems; is-
sues in vision and robotics; evolutionary model-
ing techniques; behavior-based approaches;
pre-cognitive and cognitive architectures. Ex-
amines problems and sources of simplification
presented by a physically embodied system
relative to unembodied intelligence.

R. A. Brooks

6.837 Computer Graphics

Prereq.: 6.046J, 18.06
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Introduction to computer graphics hardware, al-
gorithms, and software. Topics include line
generators, affine transformations, line and
polygon clipping, splines, interactive techni-
ques, perspective projection, solid modeling,
hidden surface algorithms, lighting models,
shading, and animation. Substantial program-
ming experience required. 2 Engineering
Design Points.

S. Teller

6.838J Advanced Topics in Computer
Graphics
(New)

(Same subject as 4.214J)
Prereq.: 6.837 or 4.210

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

In-depth study of an active research topic in
computer graphics. Topics change each term.
Readings from the literature, student presenta-
tions, short assignments, and a programming
project.

J. Dorsey

6.840J Theory of Computation

(Same subject as 18.404J)
Prereq.: 6.046J or 6.851

G (Fall)

4-0-8 (H except XVIII)

See description under subject 18.404J.
S. Goldwasser, M. Karchmer

6.841J Advanced Complexity Theory

(Same subject as 18.405J)
Prereq.: 6.840J

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 18.405J.
S. Goldwasser, M. Sipser

Descriptions of Subjects 361


--- 02.pdf Page 33 ---
School of Engineering

-_-? OOS —— EEE

6.845 Parallel Processing: VLSI and
Microarchitecture

Prereq.: 6.823, 6.371

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-5-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Principles and practical issues in the construc-

tion of parallel VLSI computing systems.
Trends in VLSI technology. Estimation of area,
performance, and power. Parallel-computer
mechanisms and machine organization:
processing-element architecture and memory-
system organization. Communication in VLSI
systems: density and timing models; network
topology; routing algorithms; flow-control
methods. Special-purpose VLSI chips: logic-
added memories, sensors, signal and image
processors. Class project. Alternate years. 6
Engineering Design Points.

W. J. Dally

6.846 Parallel Processing: Systems
Architecture and Applications

Prereq.: 6.823 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles in the design and programming of

parallel machines. Continuum, particle, and
graph applications. Communication and
synchronization. Locality in parallel computa-
tions. Computational models and parallel com-
puters: dataflow, shared memory, data
parallel, message passing. Parallel machine
mechanisms such as full-empty synchroniza-
tion bits, cache coherence, multithreading.
Design and performance evaluation of multi-
processor systems. Compilation and runtime
technologies: partitioning, placement, schedul-
ing. Substantial project required. Alternate
years. 4 Engineering Design Points.

A. Agarwal

6.847 Dataflow Architecture and
Languages

Prereq.: 6.001, 6.004

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The dataflow model as a basis for designing

parallel systems. Static and dynamic dataflow
graphs. Implicit parallel programming using
functional languages and their extensions.
Higher-order functions, non-strictness,
polymorphism. Nondeterministic programming
and resource managers. Operational seman-
tics and term rewriting systems. The A-cal-
culus. Optimizations and static analysis.
Compiling into dataflow graphs; partitioning for
multi-threaded architectures.

Arvind

6.848J Theory of Parallel and VLSI
Computation

(Same subject as 18.435J)
Prereq.: 6.046J or 6.851

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 18.435J.
C. E. Leiserson, F. T. Leighton

6.851 Theory of Algorithms

Prereq.: 18.06 or 18.700; 6.042J or 18.310
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Techniques for design and analysis of algo-

rithms, emphasizing mathematical methods
and proofs. Proof-oriented version of 6.046J/
18.410J. Topics: Data structures, sorting,
selection, hashing. Solving recurrences. Upper
and lower bounds. Dynamic programming.
Divide and conquer. Graph algorithms: span-
ning trees, matching, shortest paths, max flow.
Matrix operations. Fast Fourier transform. In-
teger and polynomial arithmetic. Permutation
group membership. Primality testing. Linear
programming. Parallel algorithms.

R. L. Rivest

6.852J Distributed Algorithms

(Same subject as 18.437J)
Prereq.: 6.046J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Design and analysis of concurrent algorithms,

emphasizing those suitable for use in dis-
tributed networks. Process synchronization, al-
location of computational resources,
distributed consensus, distributed graph algo-
rithms, election of a leader in a network, dis-
tributed selection, distributed termination,
deadlock detection, concurrency control, com-
munication, clock synchronization. Special con-
sideration given to issues of efficiency and
fault tolerance. Formal models for distributed
computation. Alternate years.

N. A. Lynch

6.853 Computer Systems

Prereq.: 6.033

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Study and discussion of the literature of com-

puter systems. Subject is designed to help stu-
dents understand the nature of research in
computer systems and to develop a student’s
ability to judge ideas critically. Computer ar-
chitecture, networks, operating systems,
programming language/system interface, net-
work protocols, file systems, replication, protec-
tion, transactions, database systems,
computer graphics, user interfaces, and ap-
plication systems. Alternate years.

D. K. Gifford

6.854J Advanced Algorithms

(Same subject as 18.415J)

Prereq.: 6.851 or 6.046J; 18.06 or 18.700
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 18.415J.
R. L. Rivest, M. Goemans

6.857 Network and Computer Security
(New)

Prereq.: 6.033, 6.046J or 6.042J
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Techniques for achieving security in multi-user
computer systems and distributed computer
systems. Topics: physical security; discretion-
ary and mandatory access control; biometrics;
information-flow models of security; covert
channels; models for integrity; elementary cryp-
tography; logic of authentication; electronic
cash; viruses; firewalls; electronic voting; risk
assessment; secure web browsers. Enrollment
may be limited.

R. L. Rivest

6.863J Natural Language and the Computer
Representation of Knowledge

(Same subject as 9.611J)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Relationship between computer representation
of knowledge and the structure of natural lan-
guage. Emphasizes development of the
analytical skills necessary to judge the com-
putational implications of grammatical for-
malisms, and uses concrete examples to
illustrate particular computational issues. Effi-
cient parsing algorithms for context-free gram-
mars; augmented transition network
grammars. Question answering systems. Ex-
tensive laboratory work on building natural lan-
guage processing systems. 8 Engineering
Design Points.

R. C. Berwick

6.866 Machine Vision

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Intensive introduction to the process of
generating a symbolic description of the en-
vironment from an image. Students expected
to attend the 6.801 lectures as well as oc-
casional seminar meetings on special topics.
Material presented in 6.801 is supplemented
by reading from the literature. Students re-
quired to prepare a paper analyzing research
in a selected area.

B. K. P. Hom

362 Chapter Vill


--- 02.pdf Page 34 ---
6.868J The Society of Mind

(Same subject as MAS.731J)

Prereq.: Must have read The Society of Mind,
permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to a theory that tries to explain

how minds are made from collections of
simpler processes. Treats such aspects of
thinking as vision, language, learning, reason-
ing, memory, consciousness, ideals, emotions,
and personality. Incorporates ideas from
psychology, artificial intelligence, and com-
puter science to resolve theoretical issues

such as wholes vs parts, structural vs function-
al descriptions, declarative vs procedural repre-
sentations, symbolic vs connectionist models,
and logical vs common-sense theories of learn-

ing.
M. Minsky

6.871 Knowledge-Based Applications
Systems

Prereq.: 6.034; 6.036 or 6.824
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Development of programs containing a sig-
nificant amount of knowledge about their ap-
plication domain. Outline: 1) brief review of
relevant Al techniques; 2) case studies from a
number of application domains, chosen to il-
lustrate principles of system development; 3)
discussion of technical issues encountered in
building a system, including selection of
knowledge representation, knowledge acquisi-
tion, etc.; and 4) discussion of current and fu-
ture research. Hands-on experience in building
an expert system (term project). 8 Engineering
Design Points.

R. Davis, P. Szolovits, H. E. Shrobe

6.872 Medical Computing
(New)

Prereq.: 6.034
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes computational needs of clinical
medicine, reviews systems and approaches
that have been used to support those needs,
and examines new technologies. Topics: the
nature of clinical data; architecture and design
of healthcare information systems; privacy and
security issues; medical expert systems; com-
puting support for medical education. Case
studies of contemporary systems. Term project
using a large pseudonymized clinical dataset
integrates classroom topics. 6 Engineering
Design Points.

P. Szolovits

6.875J Cryptography and Cryptanalysis

(Same subject as 18.425J)
Prereq.: 6.046J or 6.851 or 18.421
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A rigorous introduction to modern cryptog-
raphy. Emphasis on the fundamental cryp-
tographic primitives of public-key encryption,
digital signatures, and pseudo-random number
generation, and their computational complexity
requirements.

S. Goldwasser

Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Course 6

6.876J Advanced Topics in
Cryptography

(Same subject as 18.426J)
Prereq.: 6.875J

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Recent results in cryptography and fault-

tolerant distributed computing presented and
discussed. Lectures by instructor, invited
speakers, and students. Alternate years.

S. Goldwasser

6.891-6.899 Special Topics in the Computer
Sciences

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

A seminar-type discussion of special topics in

the computer sciences. Opportunity for
graduate students and instructors to inves-
tigate a topic of common interest. Topic and
staff announced each term. These subjects
given independently or sequentially, as cir-

Special Subjects

6.901 Inventions and Patents
Prereq.: 14.02

U (Fall)

3-0-6

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 999.
R. H. Rines

6.910 Special Studies in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for individual study at the under-

graduate level related to electrical engineering
and computer science not covered by other
subjects offered by the Department. Student is
responsible for initiation of arrangements and
filing of proposal. Consult Department Under-
graduate Office.

A. C. Smith

6.911-6.914 Special Advanced
Undergraduate Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

6.915-6.919 Special Advanced
Undergraduate Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced undergraduate subjects not offered
in the regular curriculum. Consult Department
to learn of offerings for a particular term.
Registration by permission of instructor.

A. C. Smith

6.921 VI-A internship

Prereq.: —

U (Summer)

0-12-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Provides academic credit for the first two As-
signments of VI-A students at companies af-
filiated with the Department's VI-A Internship
Program. Students register for this subject
twice. The grade of “J” is given following com-
pletion of the first Assignment. Students must
complete the second Assignment in order to
receive the full academic credit of 24 units for
this subject. Enrollment limited to students par-
ticipating in the VI-A Internship Program.

M. Zahn

6.922 Advanced VI-A Internship

Prereq.: 6.921
U (Spring, Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]

Provides academic credit for the third Assign-
ment of VI-A students at companies affiliated
with the Department's VI-A Internship Pro-
gram. Enrollment limited to students participat-
ing in the VI-A Internship Program.

M. Zahn

6.929 Undergraduate Project Presentation

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-3-0

Can be repeated for credit

Registration for written presentation of the ad-
vanced undergraduate project, when the
project work is carried out as part of a VI-A As-
signment. Consult Department Undergraduate
Office.

A. C. Smith

6.930 Management in Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

J.-H. Chun, H. S. Marcus

Descriptions of Subjects 363


--- 02.pdf Page 35 ---
School of Engineering

6.931 Development of Inventions and
Creative Ideas

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Role of the engineer as patent expert and as

technical witness in court and patent inter-
ference and related proceedings. Rights and
obligations of engineers in connection with
educational institutions, government, and large
and small businesses. Various manners of
transplanting inventions into business opera-
tions, including development of New England
and other US electronics and biotech in-
dustries and their different types of institutions.
American systems of incentive to creativity
apart from the patent laws in the atomic ener-
gy and space fields. For graduate students
only; others see 6.901.

R. H. Rines

6.936 Entrepreneurship

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
T. G. Gutowski

6.938 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni, G. Apostolakis

6.946J Variational Mechanics: A
Computational Approach

(Same subject as 12.620J, 8.351J)
Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03, 6.001 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 12.620J.
G. J. Sussman, J. Wisdom

6.951 Graduate VI-A Internship

Prereq.: 6.922
G (Fall, Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]

Provides academic credit for a Graduate As-

signment of graduate students at companies
affiliated with the Department's VI-A Internship
Program. Enrollment limited to graduate stu-
dents participating in the VI-A Internship Pro-
gram.

M. Zahn

364 Chapter Vill

6.952 Graduate VI-A Internship

Prereq.: 6.951
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]

Provides academic credit for graduate stu-

dents who require an additional term at the
company to complete the Graduate Assign-
ment of the Department's VI-A Internship Pro-
gram. This academic credit is for registration
purposes only and cannot be used toward ful-
filling the requirements of any degree program.
Enrollment limited to graduate students par-
ticipating in the VI-A Internship Program.

M. Zahn

6.961 Introduction to Research in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity to become involved in graduate re-

search, under guidance of a staff member, on
a problem of mutual interest to student and su-
pervisor. Recommended for all entering full-
time graduate students in the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
Individual programs subject to approval of
professor in charge. Enrollment restricted to
regular graduate students in Electrical En-
gineering and Computer Science. Normal
registration is for 12 units.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.962-6.969 Special Studies in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for study of graduate-level topics

related to electrical engineering and computer
science but not included elsewhere in the cur-
riculum. Registration under this subject normal-
ly used for situations involving individual study
(under supervision of a faculty member) of
topics of mutual interest to student and super-
visor, but may, when appropriate, be used for
small study groups. Normal registration is for
12 units. Registration subject to approval of
professor in charge.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.971-6.979 Special Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study of advanced sub-

jects related to electrical engineering and com-
puter science not otherwise included in
curriculum. Offerings are initiated by members
of EECS faculty on an ad hoc basis, subject to
Departmental approval.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.980 Teaching Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For qualified students interested in gaining
teaching experience. Classroom, tutorial, or
laboratory teaching under the supervision of a
faculty member. Enrollment limited by
availability of suitable teaching assignments.
F. C. Hennie

6.981-6.989 Teaching Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

For Teaching Assistants in Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Science, in cases where
teaching assignment is approved for academic
credit by the Department.

F. C. Hennie

6.991-6.999 Research in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For Research Assistants in Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Science, in cases where the
assigned research is approved for academic
credit by the Department. Hours arranged with
research supervisor.

F..R. Morgenthaler

6.UR Undergraduate Research in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Extended participation in the work of a faculty
member or research group, including inde-
pendent study of the literature, direct involve-
ment in the group's research, and project work
under an individual faculty member. Research
is arranged by mutual agreement between the
student and a member of the faculty of the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science, and may continue over several
terms. Forms and instructions for the initial let-
ter of intent and final summary report are avail-
able in the Department Undergraduate Office.
Grading P/D/F only.

R. D. Thomton

6.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research leading to the
writing of an M.Eng., S.M., E.E., E.C.S., Ph.D.,
or Sc.D. thesis; to be arranged by the student
and an appropriate MIT faculty member.

F. R. Morgenthaler


--- 03.pdf Page 1 ---
School of Engineering

6.931 Development of Inventions and
Creative Ideas

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Role of the engineer as patent expert and as

technical witness in court and patent inter-
ference and related proceedings. Rights and
obligations of engineers in connection with
educational institutions, government, and large
and small businesses. Various manners of
transplanting inventions into business opera-
tions, including development of New England
and other US electronics and biotech in-
dustries and their different types of institutions.
American systems of incentive to creativity
apart from the patent laws in the atomic ener-
gy and space fields. For graduate students
only; others see 6.901.

R. H. Rines

6.936 Entrepreneurship

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
T. G. Gutowski

6.938 Engineering Risk-Benefit Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni, G. Apostolakis

6.946J Variational Mechanics: A
Computational Approach

(Same subject as 12.620J, 8.351J)
Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03, 6.001 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 12.620J.
G. J. Sussman, J. Wisdom

6.951 Graduate VI-A Internship

Prereq.: 6.922
G (Fall, Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]

Provides academic credit for a Graduate As-

signment of graduate students at companies
affiliated with the Department's VI-A Internship
Program. Enrollment limited to graduate stu-
dents participating in the VI-A Internship Pro-
gram.

M. Zahn

364 Chapter Vill

6.952 Graduate VI-A Internship

Prereq.: 6.951
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-12-0 [P/D/F]

Provides academic credit for graduate stu-

dents who require an additional term at the
company to complete the Graduate Assign-
ment of the Department's VI-A Internship Pro-
gram. This academic credit is for registration
purposes only and cannot be used toward ful-
filling the requirements of any degree program.
Enrollment limited to graduate students par-
ticipating in the VI-A Internship Program.

M. Zahn

6.961 Introduction to Research in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity to become involved in graduate re-

search, under guidance of a staff member, on
a problem of mutual interest to student and su-
pervisor. Recommended for all entering full-
time graduate students in the Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.
Individual programs subject to approval of
professor in charge. Enrollment restricted to
regular graduate students in Electrical En-
gineering and Computer Science. Normal
registration is for 12 units.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.962-6.969 Special Studies in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for study of graduate-level topics

related to electrical engineering and computer
science but not included elsewhere in the cur-
riculum. Registration under this subject normal-
ly used for situations involving individual study
(under supervision of a faculty member) of
topics of mutual interest to student and super-
visor, but may, when appropriate, be used for
small study groups. Normal registration is for
12 units. Registration subject to approval of
professor in charge.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.971-6.979 Special Subjects in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study of advanced sub-

jects related to electrical engineering and com-
puter science not otherwise included in
curriculum. Offerings are initiated by members
of EECS faculty on an ad hoc basis, subject to
Departmental approval.

F. R. Morgenthaler

6.980 Teaching Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For qualified students interested in gaining
teaching experience. Classroom, tutorial, or
laboratory teaching under the supervision of a
faculty member. Enrollment limited by
availability of suitable teaching assignments.
F. C. Hennie

6.981-6.989 Teaching Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

For Teaching Assistants in Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Science, in cases where
teaching assignment is approved for academic
credit by the Department.

F. C. Hennie

6.991-6.999 Research in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For Research Assistants in Electrical Engineer-
ing and Computer Science, in cases where the
assigned research is approved for academic
credit by the Department. Hours arranged with
research supervisor.

F..R. Morgenthaler

6.UR Undergraduate Research in Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Extended participation in the work of a faculty
member or research group, including inde-
pendent study of the literature, direct involve-
ment in the group's research, and project work
under an individual faculty member. Research
is arranged by mutual agreement between the
student and a member of the faculty of the
Department of Electrical Engineering and Com-
puter Science, and may continue over several
terms. Forms and instructions for the initial let-
ter of intent and final summary report are avail-
able in the Department Undergraduate Office.
Grading P/D/F only.

R. D. Thomton

6.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research leading to the
writing of an M.Eng., S.M., E.E., E.C.S., Ph.D.,
or Sc.D. thesis; to be arranged by the student
and an appropriate MIT faculty member.

F. R. Morgenthaler


--- 03.pdf Page 2 ---
Department of Biology Course 7

Course 7

7.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

7.URG Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in the
Department of Biology. For further information,
consult the Departmental Coordinator: Gene
Brown. Permission of department required.

7.012, 7.013, 7.014 Introductory Biology

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 BIOLOGY

All three subjects cover the same core
material, which includes the fundamental prin-
ciples of biochemistry, genetics, molecular biol-
ogy, and cell biology. In addition, each version
of the subject has its own distinctive material,
described below. The core material focuses on
function at a molecular level: the structure and
regulation of genes, and the structure and syn-
thesis of proteins; how these molecules are in-
tegrated into cells; and how cells are

integrated into cells; and how cells are in-
tegrated into multicellular systems and or-
ganisms.

Coordinators: U. RajBhandary, P. Matsudaira
Instructors: B. White, S. Verghis

Fall Term: 7.012. Exploration into areas of
current research in cell biology, immunology,
neurobiology, developmental biology, and
evolution. Spring Term: 7.013. Application of
the fundamental principles toward an under-
standing of cells, human genetics and dis-
eases, infectious agents, cancer, the immune
system, and evolution. Spring Term: 7.014. Ap-
plication of the fundamental principles toward
an understanding of microorganisms as
geochemical agents responsible for the evolu-
tion and renewal of the biosphere and of their
role in human health and disease.

Fall Term: 7.012: R. Weinberg, H. Lodish
Spring Term: 7.013: D. Page, U. RajBhandary
Term 2: 7.014: S. Chisholm, G. Walker

Biology

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter Vil under the School of Science.

7.02 Introduction to Experimental Biology

Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014
U (Fall, Spring)
2-8-5 Institute LAB

Application of experimental techniques in

biochemistry, microbiology, and cell biology.
Emphasizes integrating factual knowledge with
understanding the design of experiments and
data analysis to prepare the students for re-
search projects. Concurrent registration with
7.03 or 7.05 is recommended. Restricted to up-
perclassmen. 12 units may be applied to the
General Institute Laboratory Requirement.

Fall Term: J. King, A. Rich

Spring Term: J. Liu, M. Fox

7.03 Genetics

Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014
U (Fall)

4-0-8 REST

The principles of genetics with application to

the study of biological function at the level of
molecules, cells, and multicellular organisms.
Structure and function of genes and
chromosomes. Biological variation resulting
from recombination, mutation, and selection.
Use of genetic methods to analyze protein
function, gene regulation, development, and in-
herited disease.

C. Kaiser, L. Guarente

7.05 General Biochemistry

Prereq.: 5.12; 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014 or per-

mission of instructor

U (Spring)

5-0-7 REST

Credit cannot also be received for 5.07

Contributions of biochemistry toward an under-

standing of the structure and functioning of or-
ganisms, tissues, and cells. Chemistry and
functions of constituents of cells and tissues
and the chemical and physical-chemical basis
for the structures of nucleic acids, proteins,
and carbohydrates. General metabolism of car-
bohydrates, fats, and nitrogen-containing
materials such as amino acids, proteins, and
related compounds.

G. M. Brown, P. Schimmel

7.06 Cell Biology

Prereq.: 7.05
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Biology of cells of higher organisms: structure,
function, and biosynthesis of cellular
membranes and organelles; cell growth and
oncogenic transformation; transport, receptors
and cell signaling; the cytoskeleton, the ex-
tracellular matrix, and cell movements;
chromatin structure and RNA synthesis.

R. A. Young, P. Sorger

7.08 Molecular Biology

Prereq.: 7.03; 7.05
U (Spring)
4-0-8

Detailed analysis of the biochemical
mechanisms that control the maintenance, ex-
pression, and evolution of prokaryotic and
eukaryotic genomes. Topics covered in lecture
and readings of relevant literature include:
gene regulation, DNA replication, genetic
recombination, and translation,

S. Bell, T. Baker

7.11 Biology Teaching

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged

For qualified undergraduate students inter-
ested in gaining some experience in teaching.
Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching
under the supervision of a faculty member. Stu-
dents selected by interview.

Consult Biology Student Office.

7.13 Experimental Microbial Genetics

Prereq.: 7.02, 7.03, 7.05

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-16-6

Laboratory project in microbiology and
genetics to address fundamental questions of
gene organization, regulation, and expression
using Corynebacterium glutamicum. Use of ad-
vanced genetic and rDNA technology ap-
proaches.

A. J. Sinskey

Descriptions of Subjects 365


--- 03.pdf Page 3 ---
School of Science

7.15 Experimental Molecular Biology:
Biotechnology |

Prereq.: 7.02, 7.03, 7.05
U (Fall)
2-16-6

Molecular genetic technology applied to a con-
temporary biomedical research problem in the
laboratory. Emphasis on recombinant DNA
techniques and interpretation and communica-
tion of experimental results. Recombinant
DNA methods include PCR, gene er
DNA sequencing.

P. W. Robbins, Staff

7.16 Experimental Molecular Biology:
Biotechnology Il

Prereq.: 7.02, 7.03, 7.05
U (Spring)
2-16-6

Laboratory methodology and theoretical basis
for cloning and manipulation of genes in
eukaryotic organisms. Mammalian cell culture,
biological assays with mammalian cells, isola-
tion of hybridomas that secrete monoclonal an-
tibodies, and cloning and expression of genes
in eukaryotic organisms.

D. Housman, J. Chen

7.17 Experimental Molecular Biology:
Biotechnology Ill

Prereq.: 7.02, 7.03, 7.05
U (Spring)
2-16-6

Molecular genetic technology applied to the
study of cell biology problems including regula-
tion of the cell cycle and the cytoskeleton.
Laboratory emphasizes techniques for cloning
and sequencing genes from yeast and study-
ing the function of normal and mutant human
genes in yeast.

P. Matsudaira, M. L. Pardue

7.19 Experimental Cellular Structure

Prereq.: 7.06 or 7.08
U (Fall)
2-6-4

Electron microscopic and related techniques
for investigating the structure of cells and tis-
sues with a focus on developmental and
neurobiological problems. Operation of the
transmission and scanning electron micro-
scopes and confocal light microscopes. Fixa-
tion, embedding, sectioning, and
immunostaining of cells, embryos, and mature
organs such as eye and muscle.

S. Penman, P. Reilly

366 Chapter Vill

7.20 Human Physiology
Prereq.: 7.05

U (Fall)

5-0-7

Comprehensive subject in human physiology,

emphasizing the molecular basis and applied
aspects of organ function and regulation in
health and disease. Material covered includes
a review of cell structure and function, as well
as the mechanisms by which the endocrine
and nervous systems integrate cellular metabo-
lism. Special emphasis on examining the car-
diovascular, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, and
renal systems.

R. D. Rosenberg, M. Krieger

7.21 Microbial Physiology

Prereq.: 7.05, 7.03
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Biochemical properties of bacteria and other

microorganisms that enable them to grow
under a variety of conditions. Interaction be-
tween bacteria and bacteriophages. Genetic
and metabolic regulation of enzyme action and
enzyme formation.

G. C. Walker, B. Magasanik

7.22 Developmental Biology
Prereq.: 7.08

U (Spring)

4-0-8

Principles of embryology and development

with emphasis on vertebrates. The experimen-
tal approaches discussed include: genetic
manipulation of vertebrates by transgenic,
micromanipulative, and molecular techniques.
R. Jaenisch, H. Sive

7.23 General Immunology
Prereq.: 7.05

U (Fall)

4-0-8

A comprehensive survey of immunology. In-

cludes antigen-antibody reactions, im-
munoglobulin structure, organization and
expression of immunoglobulin genes, cells and
tissues of the immune system, major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC), genes encoding
MHC proteins and T-cell antigen-specific
receptors, antibody formation, cell-mediated
immunity, complement, hypersensitivity, im-
munodeficiencies, graft rejection.

L. Steiner, H. Ploegh, J. Chen

7.27 Principles of Human Disease
(New)

Prereq.: 7.03, 7.05, 7.06

U (Spring)
4-0-8

Covers current understanding of and modern
approaches to human disease, emphasizing
the molecular and cellular basis of both infec-
tious and inheritable diseases. Specific topics
include the roles of oncogenes and tumor sup-
pressors in signal transduction, cell cycle con-
trol, and apoptosis; predisposition to cancer
and other genetic diseases; karyoptic analysis
and positional cloning; histopathology; animal
models of human disease; and disease induc-
tion by viral and other pathogenic agents.

T. Jacks, J. A. Lees

7.29J Cellular Neurobiology

(Same subject as 9.09J)
Prereq.: 7.05

U (Spring)

4-0-8

An introduction to the structure and function of
the nervous system. Emphasis placed on the
cellular properties of neurons and other ex-
citable cells. Includes the structure and
biophysical properties of excitable cells, synap-
tic transmission, neurochemistry,
neurodevelopment, and integration of informa-
tion in simple systems and the visual system.
W. G. Quinn

7.341-7.346 Advanced Undergraduate
Seminars

Prereq.: 7.03, 7.05, 7.06, or 7.08
U (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminars covering topics of current interest in
biology. Includes reading and analysis of re-
search papers and student presentations. Fall
1996-97: 7.341: Development and Evolution
of the Immune System; 7.342: Regulatory
Gene Transcription; 7.343: Unravelling the
Mechanisms of DNA Repair by Studying
Human Disease. Spring 1996-97: 7.344:
Human Gene Hunting; 7.345: Tumor Suppres-
sor Genes; 7.346: T-cell Recognition and
pong tees Contact Biology Student Office.
ta


--- 03.pdf Page 4 ---
Department of Biology Course 7

7.373 Molecular and Engineering Aspects
of Biotechnology

(Same subject as 10.441J)
Prereq.: 7.03 or 7.05, 5.60

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8

Biological and bioengineering principles for
utilization of animal cells and bacteria for
production of recombinant protein products:
post-translational processing and secretion of
proteins; gene cloning and expression in mam-
malian cells; physiology of cell growth and in
vitro cultivation; bioreactor design; protein
recovery and purification; site-specific mutation
of proteins; transgenic animals and plants.

D. 1. C. Wang, H. Lodish

7.391 Special Problems for Undergraduates

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Used for students receiving Advanced Place-

ment credit and transfer credit. Program of
study or research to be arranged with a Depart-
ment faculty member. Written report required.
Permission of Department required.

Consult Biology Student Office.

7.40 Biotechnology: Engineering of
Macromolecules

Prereq.: 7.05
U (Spring)
3-0-6

Fundamentals of genetics and biochemical

principles for the synthesis, design, and en-
gineering of biopolymers such as polyesters
and polysaccharides. Principles underlying
structure-function properties of biopolymers.
Topics include conformation analysis and
molecular properties of polymer chains in solu-
tion

C.K. Rha, A. J. Sinskey

7.411-7.419 Seminars in Biological
Oceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Selected topics in biological oceanography.
Information: A. L. Peirson (Woods Hole Staff).

7.421 Special Problems in Biological
Oceanography

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced problems in biological oceanog-
raphy with assigned reading and consultation.
Information: A. L. Peirson (Woods Hole Staff).

7.431 Topics in Marine Ecology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussions on ecological prin-

ciples and processes in marine populations,
communities, and ecosystems. Topics vary
from year to year.

H. Caswell, R. Harbison (WHOl)

7.432 Topics in Marine Physiology and
Biochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussions on physiological and

biochemical processes in marine organisms.
Topics vary from year to year.
H. Hahn, J. McDowell, J. Stegeman (WHO!)

7.434 Topics in Zooplankton Biology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussions on the biology of

marine zooplankton. Topics vary from year to
year.

L. Madin (WHOI)

7.435 Topics in Benthic Biology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussions on the biology of

marine benthos. Topics vary from year to year.

L. Mullineaux, R. Scheltema (WHO!)

7.436 Topics in Phytoplankton Biology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussion on the biology of

marine phytoplankton. Topics vary from year
to year.
R. Olson, H. Sosik, D. Anderson (WHO!)

7.437 Topics in Molecular Biological
Oceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussion on molecular biologi-

cal oceanography. Topics vary from year to
year.

7.438 Topics in the Behavior of Marine
Animals

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussion on the behavioral biol-
ogy of marine animals. Topics vary from year
to year.

P. Tyack

7.439 Topics in Marine Microbiology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Lectures and discussion on the biology of
marine prokaryotes. Topics vary from year to
year.

P. Dunlap, J. Waterbury (WHOI)

7.47 Biological Oceanography

Prereq.: Advanced level training in biology
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Intensive overview of biological oceanography.
Major biological paradigms and processes dis-
cussed, and dependence of biological proces-
ses in the ocean on physical and chemical
aspects of the environment examined. Sur-
veys the diversity of marine habitats, major
groups of taxa inhabiting those habitats, and
the general biology of the various taxa: the
production, consumption, burial, and
remineralization of organic material in the
ocean, as well as factors controlling those
processes. Structure of marine food webs and
the flow of energy within different marine
habitats detailed and contrasted.

D. Caron (WHO!)

7.491 Research in Biological
Oceanography

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Directed research in biological oceanography
not leading to graduate thesis and generally
done before the qualifying examination. Pos-
sible areas include population dynamics,
physiology, and cytology of marine microor-
ganisms; physiology, nutrition, and productivity
of phytoplankton; influence of organisms on
the composition of seawater; systematics,
physiology, and ecology of pelagic larvae,
zooplankton, benthos, and mesopelagic
fishes; physiology and migration of large
fishes; diving physiology; and use of sound by
marine mammals.

(Woods Hole Staff)

Descriptions of Subjects 367


--- 03.pdf Page 5 ---
School of Science

7.ThG Graduate Biology Thesis
Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the

writing of a Ph.D. thesis; to be arranged by the
student and an appropriate MIT faculty mem-
ber.

F. Solomon

7.50 Method and Logic in Molecular
Biology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
4-0-8 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Logic and experimental design: an in-depth dis-

cussion and assessment of biochemical, physi-
cal, and genetic methods employed in testing
hypotheses. Limited to Course VII graduate
students.

D. Housman, T. Baker, C. Kaiser, R. Young

7.51 Biochemistry for Graduate
Students

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
5-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental principles of biochemistry.
Analysis of the mode of action and structure of
regulatory, binding, and catalytic proteins.

R. T. Sauer

7.52 Genetics for Graduate Students

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of genetics, including Mendelian sys-

tems and prokaryotic genetics. Application of
principles to biological function, including
regulation and development. Mechanisms of
recombination, mutation, and evolution. Dis-
cussion of original scientific papers and review
of problem sets and exams supplement lec-
tures.

H. R. Horvitz, Staff

7.546J Principles and Methodologies of
Metabolic Engineering

(Same subject as 10.546J)

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6

See description under subject 10.546J.
Gr. Stephanopoulos, A. J. Sinskey

7.57J Genetics and Molecular
Medicine

(Subject meets with HST.181J, HST.180)
Prereq.: 7.012 or 7.013 or 7.014, 7.05

G (IAP)

4-0-8

See description under subject HST.181J.
D. E. Housman, C. Tabin

368 Chapter VIII

7.60 Cell Biology |!

Prereq.: 7.06 or 7.08
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Structure and organization of genes and
genomes, nucleic acid biosynthesis, structure
and assembly of nuclei and chromosomes,
regulation of cell cycle, DNA replication,
transposition, recombination and repair; RNA
transcription, processing and translation, dif-
ferentiation of specialized cell types, especially
lymphocytes. Literature readings.

P. Sharp, D. Baltimore

7.61 Membranes, Receptors, and Signalling

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of membrane structure and function

and the experimental approaches used to
analyze them. Cell surface receptors and sig-
nal transduction; transport across membranes;
endocytosis, subcellular sorting; cell adhesion
and its effects on cellular organization and
polarity. Illustrates the principles and methods
of cell biology from basic studies to applica-
tions to human disease states through lectures
and discussion sessions emphasizing litera-
ture readings. Limited enrollment.

R. O. Hynes, M. Krieger

7.63 Immunology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Principles of immunology, including im-
munochemistry and molecular and cellular im-
munology. An in-depth critical analysis of
current literature in the field. Particular atten-
tion paid to the function of the immune system
as a whole as studied by modern methods and
techniques. Discussions of original papers sup-
plement lectures.

S. Tonegawa, H. Ploegh, J. Chen

7.64 Advanced Cell Structure and Function

Prereq.: 7.06 or 7.08

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6

Understanding cell function and organization

into tissue requires the emerging technologies
for ultrastructural analysis. We consider mor-
phological and biochemical techniques for
Studying cell architecture in major tissues,
mechanisms of image formation that influence
data interpretation, the biochemistry of cellular
substructures and methods of chemical cell dis-
section. The cells in major body organs will
conclude the material.

S. Penman

7.65J Principles of Neuroscience

(Same subject as 9.011J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

6-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 9.01 1J.

M. Sur, E. Bizzi, S. Corkin, A. Graybiel,
W. Quinn, P. Schiller, R. J. Wurtman, T. Poggio

7.67J Genetic Neurobiology

(Same subject as 9.322J)
Prereg.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 9.322J.
W. G. Quinn, H. Steller

7.70 Regulation of Gene Expression

Prereq.: 7.03, 7.05, 7.08
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies molecular mechanisms responsible for
the regulation of gene expression in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The control of the
cell cycle gene activation and silencing and
other topics are examined. Classes involve
critical evaluation of primary research papers
in a seminar format.

B. Magasanik, Staff

7.71 Biophysical Chemistry

(Subject meets with 5.64)
Prereq.: 5.60, 7.05 or 5.07
G (Fall)

3-0-9

Principles of biophysical chemistry introduced
while discussing the structure, folding, stability,
and interactions of proteins and nucleic acids.
Topics include: an overview of protein and
nucleic acid structure; introductions to X-ray
crystallography, spectroscopy, and 2D NMR;
thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of protein
folding; and principles of protein-nucleic acid in-
teractions. Molecular mechanics introduced as
a unifying tool that relates structure, molecular
forces, and thermodynamic quantities. Meets
with undergraduate subject 5.64. Students
who take 5.64 cannot also receive credit for
7.71.

C. O. Pabo, J. R. Williamson

7.72 Development

Prereq.: 7.51 or 7.52
G (Fall)
3-0-9 [P/D/F]

Graduate discussion seminar examining in-
depth fundamental aspects of development
and differentiation. In addition, particular atten-
tion paid to the critical appraisal of current pub-
lished research in important areas of the field.
H. Sive

7.73 Human and Mouse Genetics

Prereq.: 7.52

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar covering advanced applications of the
tools of genetics to biological problems in mam-
mals, focusing on experimental approaches in
the mouse and principles of population
genetics and pedigree analysis in the human.
Topics include: construction of genetic maps;
genetic mapping of simply-inherited traits and
gene cloning by position; somatic mutation
and cancer; genetic imprinting; quantitative
genetics. Alternate years.

E. S. Lander


--- 03.pdf Page 6 ---
Department of Biology Course 7

7.75J Topics in Metabolic Biochemistry

(Same subject as 5.77J)
Prereq.: 7.05 or 5.07

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Special topics include major metabolic path-

ways for the biosynthesis of certain cellular
constituents and oxidative metabolism. Em-
phasis is on enzymology and methods used to
understand metabolism and enzymatic proces-

ses.
G. M. Brown, J. Liu

7.76 Topics in Protein Biochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
2-0-7

In-depth analysis and discussion of classic and

current literature with emphasis on the relation-
ship between protein structure and function.
Topics include binding specificity; cooperativity
and allostery; protein folding, evolution and
macromolecular assembly; sequence homol-
ogy and prediction of structure; and protein en-
gineering and design. Undergraduates should
have taken 7.71 or 5.64.

P. Kim, R. Sauer

7.77 Workshop on Nucleic Acids and Their
Interactions with Proteins
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 7.05 or 7.51
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Interactive discussions, lectures, and student

presentations, including in-class problem solv-
ing. Chemistry, structure, and function of DNA
and RNA. Biochemical, physical, and genetic
approaches to understanding nucleic acids.
Forces stabilizing nucleic acid structures.
Structural motifs in RNA molecules including
pseudoknots and tetraloops. Transfer RNAs.
Prediction of structures of large RNAs. Super-
helical and bent DNA and thermodynamic
analysis of special DNA conformations. Selec-
tion system for generating novel RNA and
DNA structures for ligand interactions.
Analysis of protein-nucleic acid interactions
with examples including repressors and ac-
tivators, nucleosomes, restriction e i
aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, and RNA bind-
ing proteins. Analysis of methods of transcrip-
tion, RNA and protein evolution in relation to
the development of peptide synthesis and the
genetic code.

P. Schimmel

7.81 Frontiers in Modern Plant Biology

Prereq.: 7.03, 7.05

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

2-0-7 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Intensive analysis of key original literature,

both classical and current, with emphasis on
experimental approaches and analysis of
primary data. Topics include regulation of cell,
tissue, and organ growth; control of gene ex-
pression; fertility, embryogenesis, and seed
development; transformation and transgenic
plants; transposable elements and genetic
structure; function and genetics of organelles;
pathogenesis and disease resistance. Student
reports and class presentations.

E. R. Signer, G. R. Fink

7.82 Selected Topics of Mammalian
Development and Genetics

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Seminar covering biological, genetic, and

molecular approaches to mouse development.
Topics include preimplantation development;
postimplantation development; cell lineage
studies; embryonic stem cells and gene target-
ing; transgenic technology; genomic imprint-
ing; tissue interactions and induction;
X-inactivation; sex determination; genetic
basis of coat color; muscle development.

R. Jaenisch, D. Page

7.84 Topics in Bacteriology

Prereq.: 7.21, permission of instructor
G (Fall)

2-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Recent developments in bacteriology:
regulatory mechanisms and membrane
phenomena.

Consult Biology Student Office.

7.85 Topics in Cell Biology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Seminar on aspects of cell cycle regulation —

mechanisms and control of DNA replication,
chromosome structure, and chromosome
segregation — using classic and current litera-
ture and emphasizing multiple approaches.

S. Bell, P. Sorger

7.87 X-Ray Crystallography of Proteins and
Nucleic Acids

Prereq.: 7.71 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Overview of the major theoretical and practical

problems involved in x-ray crystallographic
studies of macromolecules. Topics include dis-
cussion of basic diffraction theory, crystal-
lization and space group determination, data
collection, heavy atom derivative methods,
anomalous scattering, molecular replacement,
model-building and refinement.

Staff

7.88J The Protein Folding Problem

(Same subject as 5.48J, 10.543)

Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05 or equivalent

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar analyzing the mechanisms by which
the amino acid sequence of polypeptide
chains determines their three-dimensional con-
formation. Topics include: sequence deter-
minants of secondary structure; folding of
newly synthesized polypeptide chains within
cells; unfolding and refolding of proteins in
vitro; folding intermediates aggregation and
competing off-pathway reactions; role of
chaperonins, isomerases, and other helper
proteins; protein recovery problems in the
biotechnology industry; diseases associated
with protein folding defects.

J. A. King

7.89J Seminar on Pharmaceutical and
Biotechnology Industry Management

(Same subject as 15.138J, 10.940J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.138J.
T. J. Allen, C. L. Cooney, S. N. Finkelstein,
A. Sinskey

7.91 Topics in Genomics
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminars and readings in genomics. Topics
covered include infomatics, genetic and
molecular biology strategies and techniques,
and hardware systems design.

E. Lander, P. Matsudaira, Staff

7.92J Neurology, Neuropsychology, and
Neurobiology of Aging
(New)

(Same subject as 9.110J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Lectures and discussion explore the clinical,
behavioral, and molecular aspects of brain
aging processes in humans. Topics include:
loss of sensory and motor function and loss of
memory and other cognitive abilitites in normal
aging; neurodegenerative conditions, such as
Parkinson's, Alzheimer’s, and Huntington's dis-
eases, and Down's syndrome. Based on lec-
tures, readings taken from the primary
literature, and discussions. Students are ex-
pected to present topics based on their read-
ings. One written mid-term test and one final

paper.
S. Corkin, V. Ingram

ee

Descriptions of Subjects 369


--- 03.pdf Page 7 ---
School of Science

—_—_—_—“X~X—— eee

7.93 Selected Topics in Biology

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Classwork in various fields of biology not

covered by the regular subjects of instruction.
Consult Biology Student Office.

7.941 Research Problems

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

7.942 Research Problems

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Directed research in a field of biological
science, but not contributory to graduate thesis.
Consult Biology Student Office.

7.95 Cancer Biology
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 7.03, 7.06, 7.08

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Intensive analysis of historical and current

developments in cancer biology. Topics
covered in lecture and through critical reading
of relevant literature include: principles of trans-
formation, viral and cellular oncogenes, tumor
suppressor genes, tumor cell growth, and

apoptosis.
T. Jacks, J. Lees

7.96 Cell-Cell Signaling
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9 [P/D/F]

A seminar focusing on recent research in the

area of intercellular communication. Topics in-
clude intracellular signal transduction by cell
surface tyrosine and serine/theonine kinase
receptors, cytokine receptors, and cell ad-
hesion (integrin) receptors. Emphasis on tech-
niques used in receptor research, including
mutants, and on alterations in receptor func-
tion in various pathophysiologic states.

H. Lodish, R. Rosenberg

7.97 Topics in Evolution

Prereq.: 7.05 and permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar considering the role of evolutionary

thought in modern science. Topics include: dis-
cussion of Darwin's The Origin of Species;
molecular studies of protein evolution; roles of
neutral mutation, recombination, and sex in
evolution; the RNA world and the origin of life:
in vitro selection and “test tube evolution”; and
the interplay between biological thought and
computer science, with reference to complexity
theory, neural networks, genetic programming,
and artificial life.

C. Pabo

370 Chapter Vill

7.98J Neural Plasticity in Learning and
Development

(Same subject as 9.301J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Roles of neural plasticity in learning and
memory and in development of invertebrates
and mammals. An in-depth critical analysis of
current literature of molecular, cellular, genetic,
electrophysiological, and behavioral studies.
Discussion of original papers supplemented by
introductory lectures.

S. Tonegawa, W. Quinn, M. Wilson, H. Steller

7.99 Disease Intervention Through
Biotechnology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes the flow of scientific principles from
the laboratory to the diseased patient. Con-
centrates on the biotechnology industry past,
present, and future. Considers science in
academia and industry and the regulatory
hurdles required to bring scientific develop-
ments to humans.

M. Gefter


--- 03.pdf Page 8 ---
Department of Physics Course 8

Course 8

Physics

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter Vil under the School of Science.

General Undergraduate
Subjects

8.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in
physics. For further information, contact the
Departmental UROP Coordinator.

D. E. Pritchard

8.01 Physics |

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7 PHYSICS |

Credit cannot also be received for 8.012 or
8.01X

Introduces classical mechanics. Space and
time: straight-line kinematics; motion in a
plane; forces and equilibrium; experimental
basis of Newton’s laws; particle dynamics;
universal gravitation; collisions and conserva-
tion laws; work and potential energy; vibration-
al motion; conservative forces; inertial forces
and non-inertial frames; central force motions;
rigid bodies and rotational dynamics.

Fall Term: W. Busza and Staff

Spring Term: B. Wyslouch

8.012 Physics |

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

5-0-7 PHYSICS |

Credit cannot also be received for 8.01 or
8.01X

Elementary mechanics, presented at greater
depth than in 8.01. Newton’s laws, concepts of
momentum, energy, angular momentum, rigid
body motion, non-inertial systems. Uses
elementary calculus freely. Concurrent registra-
tion in a math subject more advanced than
18.01 is recommended. In addition to the
theoretical subject matter, several experiments
in classical mechanics are performed by the
students in the laboratory.

W. Ketterle

8.01X Physics |

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

5-0-7 PHYSICS |

Credit cannot also be received for 8.01 or
8.012

An introduction to basic topics in physics, sup-

ported by take-home experiments. The se-
quence of topics includes space and time;
force, work, and mechanical energy; heat and
mechanical/thermal energy conversions;
electrical and chemical energy; atomicity and
kinetic theory of gases; introduction to wave
motion; Newtonian mechanics and gravitation;
simple harmonic motion in mechanical sys-
tems. Kits of equipment are provided for the
performance of a relevant take-home experi-
ment as part of the homework each week.
Many of the experiments involve simple electri-
cal and electronic instrumentation.

P. Dourmashkin, H. V. Bradt

8.01L Physics!

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 PHYSICS |

Introduction to classical mechanics (see
description under 8.01). Material is covered
over a Longer interval, so that the subject is
completed by the end of the Independent Ac-
tivities Period. During the first month of clas-
ses, substantial emphasis is given to reviewing
and strengthening pre-calculus mathematics,
basic physics concepts, and problem-solving
skills. Delay in the use of calculus permits stu-
dents more exposure to 18.01 before the
material is used in the physics. Overall con-
tent, depth, and difficulty is otherwise identical
to that of 8.01. Enrollment is limited to 100
freshmen. Students receive credit for 8.01 on
their transcripts. Credit cannot also be
received for 8.012 or 8.01X.

G. Stephans

8.02 Physics Il

Prereq.: 8.01 or 8.01X or 8.01L or 8.012; 18.01
U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7 PHYSICS II

Credit cannot also be received for 8.022

Introduction to electromagnetism and electros-
tatics: electric charge, Coulomb's law, electric
structure of matter; conductors and dielectrics.
Concepts of electrostatic field and potential,
electrostatic energy. Electric currents, mag-
netic fields and Ampere’s law. Magnetic
materials. Time-varying fields and Faraday’s
law of induction. Basic electric circuits.
Electromagnetic waves and Maxwell's equa-
tions. Credit cannot also be received for 8.02X.
Fall Term: D. Kleppner

Spring Term: J. L. Tonry

8.022 Physics II

Prereq.: 8.012, 18.02

U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7 PHYSICS II

Credit cannot also be received for 8.02

Parallel to 8.02, but more advanced mathe-
matically. Some knowledge of vector calculus
assumed. Maxwell’s equations, in both dif-
ferential and integral form. Electrostatic and
magnetic vector potential. Properties of
dielectrics and magnetic materials. In addition
to the theoretical subject matter, several experi-
ments in electricity and magnetism are per-
formed by the students in the laboratory.
Credit cannot also be received for 8.02X.

Fall Term: A. Ashoori

Spring Term: P. Fisher

8.02X Physics II

Prereq.: 8.01, 8.01X, or 8.012

U (Spring)

5-0-7 PHYSICS Il

Designed as a sequel to 8.01X, which is the
recommended but not required prerequisite.
Main emphasis on electricity and magnetism.
Topics include currents and DC circuits;
capacitance, resistance, and nonsteady cur-
rents; Coulomb’s Law and electrostatic fields;
Gauss's Law; electric potential; magnetic fields
of currents; electromagnetic induction; mag-
netism and matter; AC circuits and resonance;
Maxwell's equations; electromagnetic fields in
space; electromagnetism and relativity;
electromagnetic radiation as waves and
photons. Kits of equipment are provided for
the performance of a relevant take-home ex-
periment as part of the homework each week.
Credit cannot also be received for 8.02 or
8.022.

J. L. Matthews

SEE

Descriptions of Subjects 371


--- 03.pdf Page 9 ---
School of Science

8.03 Physics Ill

Prereq.: 8.02 or 8.022; 18.02
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 REST

Mechanical vibrations and waves; simple har-

monic motion, superposition, forced vibrations
and resonance, coupled oscillations and nor-
mal modes; vibrations of continuous systems;
reflection and refraction; phase and group
velocity. Optics; wave solutions to Maxwell's
equations; polarization; Snell's Law, inter-
ference, Huygens'’s principle, Fraunhofer dif-
fraction, gratings.

Fall Term: F. Rasio

Spring Term: H. V. Bradt

8.033 Special Relativity and Classical
Mechanics
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02
U (Fall)
5-0-7

Normally taken by physics majors in their

sophomore year. Topics in relativity: Einstein's
postulates; consequences for simultaneity,
time dilation, length contraction, clock
synchronization; Lorentz transformation;
relativistic effects and paradoxes; invariants
and four-vectors; momentum, energy and
mass; particle collisions; principle of
equivalence. Topics in mechanics: review of
8.01, conservative force fields, one-dimen-
sional motion; central forces; celestial
mechanics; scattering cross sections; ac-
celerated coordinate systems; Lagrange’s
equations and applications; conservation laws;
rigid body motion. Credit cannot be received
for 8.20 if credit for 8.033 is or had been
received in the same or prior terms.

M. Baranger

8.04 Quantum Physics |

Prereq.: 8.03 or 6.014; 18.03
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7 REST

Experimental basis of quantum physics:
photoelectric effect, Compton scattering,
photons, Franck-Hertz experiment, the Bohr
atom, electron diffraction, deBroglie waves,
wave-particle duality of matter and light. Intro-
duction to wave mechanics: Schroedinger's
equation, wave functions, wave packets, prob-
ability amplitudes, stationary states, the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle and zero-
point energies. Solutions to Schroedinger's
equation in one dimension: transmission and
reflection at a barrier, barrier penetration,
potential wells, the simple harmonic oscillator.
Schroedinger's equation in three dimensions:
central potentials, introduction to hydrogenic
systems.

Fall Term: U. Wiese

Spring Term: T. A. Arias

8.044 Statistical Physics |

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03

U (Spring)

5-0-7

Introduction to probability, statistical
mechanics, and thei ics. Random
variables, joint and conditional probability den-
sities, functions of a random variable. Con-
cepts of macroscopic variables and
thermodynamic equilibrium, fundamental as-
sumption of statistical mechanics, microcanoni-

examples illustrating a wide variety of physical
phenomena such as magnetism, polyatomic
gases, thermal radiation, electrons in solids,
and noise in electronic devices. Concurrent en-
rollment in 8.04 is recommended.

T. J. Greytak

8.05 Quantum Physics II

Prereq.: 8.04
U (Fall, Spring)
5-0-7

General formalism of quantum mechanics:
state space, Dirac notation, representations,
matrix mechanics. Angular momentum, mag-
netic moments, time-independent perturbation
theory. Applications to atomic, molecular, and
condensed-matter systems. Perturbation
theory and the hydrogen atom: fine/hyperfine
structure, Stark effect, Zeeman and Paschen-
Back effects, Rydberg atoms. Vibrational-rota-
tional spectrum of a diatomic molecule using
Born-Oppenheimer approximation. Van der
Waals interaction in the H2 molecule. The
electron in a one-dimensional periodic poten-
tial: Bloch’s theorem, band structure.

Fall Term: A. L. Jaffe

Spring Term: T. /mai

8.059 Quantum Physics Ill

Preregq.: 8.05

U (Spring)

5-0-7

Further development of quantum mechanics
and applications to physical systems. Scatter-
ing theory: Rutherford scattering, inelastic scat-
tering, optical theorem. Identical particles:
fermions and bosons. Degenerate Fermi mat-
ter: collapsed stars, quark matter, metals, in-
sulators, and semiconductors. Thomas-Fermi
model of atoms. Hartree-Fock method: helium
atom, atomic shell model, periodic table.
Models of nuclei and hadrons. Time-depend-
ent perturbation theory: sudden and harmonic
perturbations, Fermi’s golden rule, electric and
magnetic multipole transitions, radiative decay,
Méssbauer effect. Superconductivity and the
Josephson effect.

R. L. Jaffe

Survey of basic electromagnetic phenomena:
electrostatics, magnetostatics; electromagnetic
properties of matter. Time-dependent
electromagnetic fields and Maxwell’s equa-
tions. Electromagnetic waves, emission, ab-
sorption, and scattering of radiation.

8.08 Statistical Physics Il

Prereq.: 8.05

U (Spring)

4-0-8

Probability distributions for classical and quan-
tum systems. Microcanonical, canonical, and
grand canonical partition-functions and as-
sociated thermodynamic potentials. Conditions
of thermodynamic equilibrium for homogenous
and heterogenous systems. Applications: non-
interacting Bose and Fermi gases; mean field
theories for real gases, binary mixtures, mag-
netic systems, polymer solutions; phase and
reaction equilibria, critical phenomena. Fluctua-
tions, correlation functions and susceptibilities,
Kubo formulae. Evolution of distribution func-
tions: Boltzmann and Smoluchowski equations.
K. Huang

Undergraduate Laboratory
and Special Project Subjects

8.12 Physics Project Laboratory

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
1-6-5 Institute LAB

Offers an opportunity for students to carry out
experimental projects based on their own
curiosity, interests, and ideas to study physical
phenomena, including optics, acoustics, mag-
netism, and quantum effects. Faculty help stu-
dents to determine the feasibility of proposed
projects and provide guidance in experimental
techniques, data acquisition, error analysis
and physical interpretation of results. Prior ex-
perience in a laboratory environment is not re-
quired. Not usable as a restricted elective by
Physics majors.

R. K. Yamamoto

372 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 10 ---
Department of Physics Course 8

8.122 Advanced Project Laboratory
Prereq.: 8.02

U (IAP)

1-5-3

Laboratory subject that offers students the op-

portunity to carry out experimental physics
projects of their own design. Emphasizes con-
temporary ideas in laboratory techniques and
the use of on-line data acquisition, whenever
possible. Projects designed by students are
based on physics phenomena they have en-
countered in coursework or on their own.
Faculty teach students how to use various
laboratory instruments, how to cope with pos-
sible systematic errors in their results, and how
to determine statistical errors from numerical
data.

R. K. Yamamoto

8.13 Experimental Physics |
Prereq.: 8.04

U (Fall)

0-6-12 Institute LAB

8.14 Experimental Physics I

Prereq.: 8.05, 8.13
U (Spring)
0-6-12 Institute LAB

About five fundamental laboratory experiments

carried out each term, covering most aspects
of modern physics relating to names such as
Rutherford, Franck-Hertz, Hall, Ramsauer,
Doppler, Fraunhofer, Faraday, Mossbauer,
Compton, Stern-Gerlach. Stresses basic ex-
perimental techniques and data analyses, and
written and oral presentation of experiment
results. Second term requires knowledge of
quantum mechanics at the 8.05 level. 12 units
may be applied to the General Institute
Laboratory Requirement.

G. W. Clark

8.18 Special Problems in Undergraduate
Physics

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for undergraduates to engage in

experimental or theoretical research under the
supervision of a staff member. Specific ap-
proval required in each case.

Information: J. W. Belcher.

8.19 Readings in Physics
Prereq.: —
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Supervised reading and library work. Choice of

material and allotment of time according to in-
dividual needs. For students who want to do
work not provided for in the regular subjects.
Specific approval required in each case.
Information: J. W. Belcher.

Undergraduate Elective
Subjects

8.20 Introduction to Special Relativity

Prereq.: 8.01, 8.02, 18.01
U (IAP)
2-0-7 REST

Reviews nineteenth-century science leading to

special relativity, Einstein's approach to
science and postulates of relativity, Lorentz
transformation, length contraction and time
dilation, four vectors and transformations of
four vectors, Lorentz invariants, relativistic
energy and momentum, relativisitic kinematics
and collisions, massless particles, Doppler
shift, space-time diagrams, relativity
paradoxes, the impact of relativity. This subject
is aimed at the freshman and sophomore
level. Not usable as a restricted elective by
Physics majors. Credit cannot be received for
8.20 if credit for 8.033 is or has been received
in the same or prior terms.

S. A. Rappaport

8.21 Classical Mechanics Il
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 8.033, 18.02
U (IAP)
2-0-4

Continuation of 8.033, containing the more

theoretical topics. Normally taken by physics
majors in their sophomore year. Hamilton's
Principle. Linear mechanics with applications
to continuous media. Hamiltonian formulation.
Liouville’s theorem. Action-angle variables in
one dimension. Poisson brackets. Canonical
transformations. Noether’s theorem. Integrable
vs non-integrable systems.

M. Baranger

8.231 Physics of Solids |

Prereq.: 8.044, 8.211 or 8.05
U (Fall)

4-0-8
Introduction to the basic concepts of the quan-

tum theory of solids. Topics: periodic structure
and symmetry of crystals; diffraction; recipro-
cal lattice; chemical bonding; lattice dynamics,
phonons, thermal properties; free electron gas;
model of metals; Bloch theorem and band
structure, nearly free electron approximation;
tight binding method; Fermi surface; semicon-
ductors, electrons, holes, impurities; optical
properties, excitons; magnetism.

T. J. Greytak

8.235 Superconductivity

Prereq.: 8.04, 8.044

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (IAP)
2-0-4

Experiments and phenomenology. A qualita-
tive introduction to perfect conductance and
perfect diamagnetism; thermodynamics and
the energy gap; electron (Cooper) pairing; Bar-
deen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory; quasiparticles;
phase transition and free energy; suppression
of Coulomb repulsion; Type | and Ii supercon-
ductors; vortices, coherence, and penetration
lengths; lower and upper critical fields; Landau
theory; critical phenomena; Ginzburg criterion;
liquid crystal analogs; high Tc superconduc-

tivity.
A. N. Berker

8.242 Quantum Electronics and Laser
Spectroscopy

Prereq.: 8.04 or 6.017

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-1-8

Fundamental processes in lasers and their ap-
plications to studying physical properties of
atoms and molecules. Interaction of classical
and quantum systems with electromagnetic
radiation. The physics of two-level atoms.
Laser oscillators. Techniques in nonlinear
spectroscopy, such as stimulated Raman ef-
fect, free induction decay, optical nutation,
photon echoes, and CARS. As part of the cur-
riculum, each student is required to carry out a
laboratory project. Familiarity with Maxwell's
equations and the Schroedinger equation is re-
quired.

M. S. Feld

8.243 Modern Optics

Prereq.: 8.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9

Nature of light, wave/particle duality. Polariza-
tion. Propagation of plane waves in isotropic
and anisotropic media, optical constants. Mag-
neto- and electro-optical effects. Reflection
and refraction at an interface between two
media. Fresnel equations. Interference, Michel-
son, and Fabry-Perot interferometers, Fourier
transform spectroscopy. Multilayer thin films.
Fresnel and Fraunhofer diffraction, diffraction
gratings. Ray optics. Optical resonators, Gaus-
sian beams. Lasers, threshold condition, com-
mon laser systems. Fourier optics, spatial
filtering. Holography, binary optics, micro-op-
tics. Nonlinear optics, effects of second- and
third-order nonlinear susceptibility. Fiber op-
tics. Optical detectors. Optical instruments.

R. Aggarwal

Descriptions of Subjects 373


--- 03.pdf Page 11 ---
School of Science

8.276 Nuclear and Particle Physics

Prereq.: 8.05

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

on Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
-8

A modern view of the fundamental structure of
matter. Starting from a model that views
“quarks” as basic building blocks of mesons
and baryons, the properties and interactions of
these particles are established. Quantum num-
bers and multiplet structure of particle families.
Nuclei as multibaryon systems: stability,
radioactive decay, reactions. Current topics in
nuclear and particle physics research at MIT.
J. L. Matthews

8.282 Introduction to Astrophysics and
Astronomy

Prereq.: 8.01

U (Spring)

3-0-6 REST

Quantitative introduction to physics of the
galaxy and the universe, as determined from a
variety of astronomical observations and from
cosmic ray and neutrino experiments. Topics:
the sun and “normal” stars, supernovae, pul-
sars, globular clusters, compact objects (white
dwarfs, neutron stars, black holes), optical and
X-ray stellar binary systems, interstellar
medium and star formation, galaxies, quasars,
and cosmology. Prior knowledge of astronomy
not necessary. Not usable as a restricted elec-
tive by physics majors.

B. F. Burke

8.284 Modern Astrophysics

Prereq.: 8.04, 8.05
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Applications of physics (Newtonian, statistical,
and quantum mechanics) to fundamental
processes that occur in celestial objects. In-
cludes main-sequence stars, collapsed stars
(white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes),
pulsars, supernovae, the interstellar medium,
galaxies, and as time permits, active galaxies,
quasars, and cosmology. Observational data
discussed. No prior knowledge of astronomy is
required.

P. Schechter

8.286 The Early Universe

Prereq.: 18.03, 8.02

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 REST

Introduction to modern . First half
deals with the development of the big-bang
theory from 1915 to 1980, and latter half with
recent impact of particle theory. Topics: spe-
cial relativity and the Doppler effect, New-
tonian cosmological models, introduction to
non-Euclidean spaces, thermal radiation and
early history of the universe, big-bang
nucleosynthesis, introduction to grand unified
theories and other recent developments in par-
ticle theory, baryogenesis, the inflationary
universe model, and the evolution of galactic
structure. ‘

A. H. Guth

8.287J Observational Techniques of
Optical Astronomy

(Same subject as 12.410J)

Prereq.: One subject in Astronomy or
Astrophysics

U (Fall)

2-4-6 Institute LAB

See description under subject 12.410J.
J. L. Elliot

8.289 Techniques of Radio Astronomy
(New)

Prereq.: 8.04, 8.044

U (IAP)

1-3-2

Instruments and data analysis methods used

in radio astronomy: including antennas,
receivers, calibration, signal processing, and
image processing. Emphasis on relating radio
measurements to the study of astrophysical
phenomena. Includes a project to be carried
out with Haystack Observatory’s 37-meter
radio telescope.

J. N. Hewitt, Haystack Observatory staff

8.292J Fluid Physics

(Same subject as 12.330J)

Prereq.: 8.044 or 5.60 or permission of instruc-
tor

U (Spring)

3-0-9

A physics-based introduction to the properties

of fluids and fluid systems, with examples
drawn from a broad range of sciences. Defini-
tions of fluids and the notion of continuum.
Equations of state and continuity; conservation
of momentum; the stress tensor; ideal fluids
and Euler’s equation; viscosity and Navier-
Stokes equation. Hydrostatics and mag-
netohydrodynamics. Energy considerations,
fluid thermodynamics, and isentropic flow.
Compressible vs incompressible and rotational
vs irrotational flow; Bernoulli's theorem; steady
flow and streamlines. Circulation and vorticity.
Thomson's theorem. Boundary layers. Fluid
waves and instabilities. See description under
subject 12.330J.

K. Emanuel, P. Joss

8.299 Physics Teaching

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For qualified undergraduate students inter-

ested in gaining some experience in teaching.
Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching
under the supervision of a faculty member. Stu-
dents selected by interview.

Information: J. W. Belcher.

8.ThU Undergraduate Physics Thesis

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of undergraduate research, leading

to the writing of an S.B. thesis; to be arranged
by the student under approved supervision.
J. L. Matthews

Graduate Subjects

General and Mathematical
Physics

8.311 Electromagnetic Theory

Prereq.: 8.07
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic principles of electromagnetism: ex-
perimental basis, electrostatics, magnetic
fields of steady currents, motional e.m.f. and
electromagnetic induction, Maxwell's equa-
tions, propagation and radiation of electromag-
netic waves, electric and magnetic properties
of matter, conservation laws. This is a
graduate level subject which uses appropriate
mathematics but whose emphasis is on physi-
cal phenomena and principles.

L. Levitov

8.312 Electromagnetic Theory

Prereq.: 8.311
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of 8.311 followed by an introduc-
tion to classical field theory. Special relativity
Liénard-Wiechert potentials, special topics
(may include bremsstrahlung, virtual photons,
Cerenkov radiation, multipole radiation, etc.).
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian field theory: a
choice among the electromagnetic field, the
gravitational field (general relativity), non-
— gauge fields, and the Dirac electron
eld.
L. Levitov

8.321 Quantum Theory |

Prereq.: 8.05, 8.21
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

8.322 Quantum Theory Il

Prereq.: 8.07, 8.321
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A two-semester subject on quantum theory,
stressing principles: uncertainty relation, ob-
servables, eigenstates, eigenvalues, prob-
abilities of the results of measurement,
transformation theory, equations of motion,
constants of motion. Symmetry in quantum
mechanics, representations of symmetry
groups. Variational and perturbation ap-
proximations. Systems of identical particles
and applications. Time-dependent perturbation
theory. Scattering theory: phase shifts, Born
approximation. The quantum theory of radia-
tion. Second quantization and many-body
theory. Relativistic quantum mechanics of one
electron.

J. Negele

374 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 12 ---
Department of Physics Course 8

8.323 Relativistic Quantum Field
Theory |

ng)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

8.324 Relativistic Quantum Field
Theory Il

Prereq.: 8.322, 8.323

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

8.325 Relativistic Quantum Field Theory Ill

Prereq.: 8.324
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A three-semester subject sequence on quan-
tum field theory stressing the relativistic quan-
tum field theories relevant to the physics of the
Standard Model. 8.323 is a one-semester self-
contained subject in quantum field theory. Con-
cepts and basic techniques are developed
through applications in elementary particle
physics and condensed matter physics. In-
cludes the basic tools of field theory required
for phenomenological studies. Topics: Func-
tional integral formulation of quantum
mechanics and many-particle systems. Classi-
cal field theory, symmetries, and Noether's
theorem. Quantization of scalar fields. Feyn-
man graphs, analytic properties of amplitudes
and unitarity of the S-matrix. Renormalization
and renormalization group. Spinors and the
Dirac equation. Quantization of Dirac fields. Su-
persymmetry. Quantization of abelian gauge
fields. Calculations in quantum
electrodynamics. Classical Yang-Mills fields.
The Higgs phenomenon and a description of
the Standard Model. 8.324 is the second term
of the quantum field theory sequence.
Develops in depth some of the topics dis-
cussed in 8.323 and introduces some ad-
vanced material. Topics: Quantization of
nonabelian gauge theories. BRST symmetry.
Perturbation theory anomalies. Renormaliza-
tion and symmetry breaking. The renormaliza-
tion group. Critical exponents and scalar field
theory. Conformal field theory. 8.325 is the
third and last term of the quantum field theory
sequence. Its aim is the proper theoretical dis-
cussion of the physics of the standard model.
Topics: Quantum chromodynamics. Deep-in-
elastic scattering and structure functions.
Basics of lattice gauge theory. Operator
products and effective theories. Detailed struc-
ture of the standard model; spontaneously
broken gauge theory and its quantization. In-
stantons and 6-vacua. Topological defects.
8.323: K. Johnson, 8.324: J. Goldstone

8.325: L. Randall

8.333 Statistical Mechanics |

Prereq.: 8.044, 8.05
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

8.334 Statistical Mechanics Il

Prereq.: 8.333
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A two-semester course on statistical
mechanics. Basic principles are examined in
8.333: the laws of thermodynamics and the
concepts of temperature, work, heat, and
entropy. Postulates of classical statistical
mechanics, microcanonical, canonical, and
grand canonical distributions; applications to
lattice vibrations, ideal gas, photon gas. Quan-
tum statistical mechanics; Fermi and Bose sys-
tems. Interacting systems: cluster expansions,
van der Waal’s gas, mean-field theory. Topics
from modern statistical mechanics are ex-
plored in 8.334: the hydrodynamic limit and
classical field theories. Phase transitions and
broken symmetries: universality, correlation
functions and scaling theory. The renormaliza-
tion approach to collective phenomena.
Dynamic critical behavior. Random systems.
N. Berker

8.351J Variational Mechanics: A
Computational Approach

(Same subject as 12.620J, 6.946J)
Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03, 6.001 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 12.620J.
J. Wisdom, G. J. Sussman

8.361 Quantum Theory of Many-Particle
Systems

Prereq.: 8.322, 8.333

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces general many-body theory ap-

plicable to low temperature, nuclear, and solid-
state physics. Reviews occupation number
representation and classical Mayer expansion.
Perturbation theory: diagrammatic expansions
and linked-cluster theorem for zero or finite
temperature systems of fermions or bosons.
Green's functions: analytic properties, equa-
tions of motion, relation to observables, ap-
proximations, linear response theory, random
phase approximation. Superconductivity:
electron-phonon interaction, instability of nor-
mal state, BCS ground state, perturbation
theory.

T. W. Donnelly

8.381, 8.382 Selected Topics in Theoretical
Physics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics of current interest in theoretical
physics, varying from year to year. Subject not
routinely offered; given when sufficient interest
is indicated.

Information: G. F. Koster.

8.391, 8.392 Special Problems in Graduate
Physics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced problems in any area of experimen-
tal or theoretical physics, with assigned read-
ing and consultations.

Information: G. F. Koster.

8.399 Physics Teaching

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For qualified graduate students interested in
gaining some experience in teaching.
Laboratory, tutorial, or classroom teaching
under the supervision of a faculty member, Stu-
dents selected by interview.

Information: G. F. Koster.

Physics of Atoms, Radiation,
Solids, Fluids, and Plasmas

8.421 Atomic and Optical Physics |

Prereq.: 8.05

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The first of a two-semester subject sequence
that provides the foundations for contemporary
research in selected areas of atomic and opti-
cal phsyics. The interaction of radiation with
atoms: resonance; absorption, stimulated and
spontaneous emission; methods of resonance,
dressed atom formalism, masers and lasers,
cavity quantum electrodynamics; structure of
simple atoms, behavior in very strong fields;
fundamental tests: time reversal, parity viola-
tions, Bell's inequalities; experimental methods.
D. Pritchard

8.422 Atomic and Optical Physics Il

Prereq.: 8.05

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The second of a two-semester subject se-
quence that provides the foundations for con-
temporary research in selected areas of
atomic and optical physics. Non-classical
States of light: squeezed states; multi-photon
processes, Raman scattering; coherence: level
crossings, quantum beats, double resonance,
superradiance; trapping and cooling: light for-
ces, laser cooling, atom optics, spectroscopy
of trapped atoms and ions; atomic interactions:
classical collisions, quantum scattering theory,
ultracold collisions; experimental methods.

W. Ketterle

Descriptions of Subjects 375


--- 03.pdf Page 13 ---
School of Science

8.481, 8.482 Selected Topics in Physics
of Atoms and Radiation

Prereq.: 8.321
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presentation of topics of current interest, with

content varying from year to year. Subject not
routinely offered; given when sufficient interest
is indicated.

Information: G. F. Koster.

8.510J Application of Group Theory to the
Physics of Solids

(Same subject as 6.734J)
Prereq.: 8.231 or 6.732

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.734J.
M. S. Dresselhaus
8.511 Theory of Solids |

Prereq.: 8.231
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

First term of a theoretical treatment of the

physics of solids. Concept of elementary ex-
citations. Symmetry: translational, rotational,
and time-reversal invariances: theory of repre-
sentations. Energy bands: APW, OPW, pseu-
dopotential and LCAO schemes. Survey of
electronic structure of metals, semimetals,
semiconductors, and insulators. Excitons. Criti-
cal points. Response functions. Interactions in
the electron gas.

P. Lee

8.512 Theory of Solids I!
Prereq.: 8.511

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Second term of a theoretical treatment of the

physics of solids. Interacting electron gas:
many-body formulation, Feynman diagrams,
random phase approximation and beyond.
General theory of linear response: dielectric
function; sum rules; plasmons; optical proper-
ties; applications to semiconductors, metals,
and insulators. Transport properties: non-inter-
acting electron gas with impurities, diffusons.
Quantum Hall effect: integral and fractional.
Electron-phonon interaction: general theory,
applications to metals, semiconductors and in-
sulators, polarons, field-theory description. Su-
perconductivity: experimental observations,
phenomenological theories, B.C.S. theory.

P. Lee

8.513 Many-body Techniques in
Condensed Matter Physics

Prereq.: 8.511, 8.512
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics vary depending on lecturer. In 1996—

97, introduces the use of functional integrals in
condensed matter physics. Topics include
quantum systems coupled to heat baths, the
Hubbard-Stratonovitch formalism illustrated by
the superconductivity order parameter, density
of states of disordered systems and the quan-
tum Hall effect, and the scaling theory of
localization and transport in mesoscopic sys-
tems.

X.-G. Wen

8.515J Biological Physics

(Same subject as HST.450J)

Prereq.: 8.044 desirable but not necessary
G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Designed to provide seniors and first-year

graduate students with a quantitative, analyti-
cal understanding of selected biological
phenomena. Topics include: Experimental and
theoretical basis for the phase boundaries and
equation of state of concentrated protein solu-
tions, with application to diseases such as
sickle cell anemia and cataract. Protein-ligand
binding and linkage and the theory of allosteric
regulation of protein function, with application
to proteins as stores as transporters in respira-
tion, enzymes in metabolic pathways,
membrane receptors, regulators of gene ex-
pression, and self-assembling scaffolds. The
physics of locomotion and chemoreception in
bacteria and the biophysics of vision including
the theory of transparency of the eye,
molecular basis of photo reception and the
detection of light as a signal to noise dis-
crimination.

G. Benedek, F. Villars

8.532J Modern Topics in Solid State
Physics

(Same subject as 6.735J)
Prereq.: 6.732 or 8.231

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Quantum wells, superlattices, 2-D electron sys-

tems, quantized Hall effect, intercalation, semi-
conductor-metal transition, one-electron
systems, organic conductors, magnetic semi-
conductors, localization phenomena, Bohm-
Aharanov effect, Fullerenes.

M. S. Dresselhaus

8.562 Correlations and Critical Behavior
in Condensed Matter

Prereq.: 8.511, 8.333

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Views condensed-matter physics through
space- and time-dependent correlation func-
tions measured by scattering spectroscopy

Treats in detail experimental techniques of x-
ray, light, electron, and neutron scattering.
Theoretical development is strongly
phenomenological to elucidate physical be-
havior with minimal mathematical complexity.
Uses conservation laws, broken symmetry,
and the fluctuation-dissipation theorem to il-
lustrate the interconnection between apparent-
ly diverse systems, with special attention to
behavior near phase transitions.

S. Mochrie

8.575J Statistical Thermodynamics of
Complex Liquids

(Same subject as 22.52J, 10.44J)
Prereq.: 8.08, 10.213, or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.52J.
S. H. Chen, D. Blankschtein

8.581, 8.582 Selected Topics in Physics of
Solids

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9

Can be repeated for credit

Presentation of topics of current interest, with
contents varying from year to year. Subject not
routinely offered; given when sufficient interest
is indicated.

Information: T. J. Greytak.

8.613J Introduction to Plasma Physics |

(Same subject as 6.651J, 22.611J)
Prereq.: 6.014 or 8.07; 18.04 or 18.075
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces plasma phenomena relevant to
energy generation by controlled thermonuclear
fusion and to astrophysics. Coulomb collisions
and transport processes. Motion of charged
particles in magnetic fields; plasma confine-
ment schemes. MHD models; simple equi-
librium and stability analysis. Two-fluid
hydrodynamic plasma models; wave propaga-
tion in a magnetic field. Introduces kinetic
theory; Viasov plasma model; electron plasma
waves and Landau damping; ion-acoustic
waves; streaming instabilities.

A. Bers, B. Coppi

376 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 14 ---
Department of Physics Course 8

8.614J Introduction to Plasma
Physics Il

(Same subject as 6.652J, 22.612J)
Prereq.: 6.651J or 8.613J or 22.611J
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Linear waves and instabilities in magnetized

plasma; solutions of Viasov-Maxwell equations
in homogeneous and inhomogeneous plas-
mas; conservation principles for energy and
momentum; quasi-linear theory and nonlinear
stabilization; solitons and coherent nonlinear
phenomena; collisions and discrete particle ef-
fects; fluctuations in a stable plasma; Fokker-
Planck equation and transport phenomena.

P. Catto

8.624 Plasma Waves

Prereq.: 8.613J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Comprehensive theory of electromagnetic

waves in a magnetized plasma. Wave
propagation in cold and hot plasmas. Energy
flow. Absorption by Landau and cyclotron
damping and by transit time magnetic pumping
(TTMP). Wave propagation in inhomogeneous
plasma: accessibility, WKB theory, mode con-
version, connection formulae, Budden tunnel-
ing. Applications to RF plasma heating, wave
propagation in the ionosphere and laser-plas-
ma interactions. Wave propagation in toroidal
plasmas, and applications to ion cyclotron
(ICRF), electron cyclotron (ECRH), and lower
hybrid (LHH) wave heating. Quasi-linear
theory and applications to RF current drive in
tokamaks. Extensive discussion of relevant ex-
perimental observations.

M. Porkolab, P. Bonoli

8.641 Physics of High-Energy
Plasmas |

Prereq.: 8.613J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

8.642 Physics of High-Energy
Plasmas Il

Prereq.: 8.613J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic concepts of plasmas, with temperatures

of thermonuclear interest, relevant to fusion re-
search and astrophysics. Microscopic
transport processes due to inter-particle col-
lisions and collective modes (e.g.,
microinstabilities). Relevant mac!

transport coefficients (electrical resistivity, ther-
mal conductivities, particle “diffusion”).
Runaway and slide-away regimes. Magnetic
reconnection processes and their relevance to
experimental observations. Radiation emission
from inhomogeneous plasmas. Conditions for
thermonuclear burning and ignition (D-T and
“advanced” fusion reactions, plasmas with
polarized nuclei). Role of “impurity” nuclei.
“Finite-B” (pressure) regimes and ballooning
modes. Convective modes in configuration
and velocity space. Trapped particle regimes.
Nonlinear and explosive instabilities. Interac-
tion of positive and negative energy modes.
Each subject can be taken independently.

B. Coppi

8.681, 8.682 Selected Topics in Fluid and
Plasma Physics

Prereq.: 8.613J

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Presentation of topics of current interest, with

content varying from year to year. Subject not
routinely offered; given when interest is indi-
cated.

Information: M. Porkolab.

Nuclear and Particle Physics

8.701 Introduction to Nuclear and Particle
Physics

Prereq.: 8.323
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The phenomenology and experimental founda-
tions of particle and nuclear physics; the fun-
damental forces and particles, composites.
Interactions of particles with matter, detectors.
SU(2), SU(3), models of mesons and baryons.
QED, weak interactions, parity violation, lepton-
nucleon scattering, structure functions. QCD,
gluon field and color. W and Z fields, electro-
weak unification, the CKM matrix. Nucleon-
nucleon interactions, properties of nuclei,
single and collective particle models. Electron
and hadron interactions with nuclei. Relativistic
heavy ion collisions, transition to quark-gluon
plasma.

L. Osbome

8.711 Nuclear Physics

Prereq.: 8.321, 8.701
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Experimental foundations and theory of the
structure of nucleons and nuclei. Nucleon ex-
cited states, form factors. Nucleon-nucleon in-
teraction, few body systems, mesonic current
and quark effects. Electromagnetic and hadron
scattering from nucleons and nuclei with em-
phasis on spin degrees of freedom. Many-
body physics, nuclear saturation, shell and
collective models, correlations, electromag-
netic transitions, giant resonances, sum rules,
weak interactions. Inclusive and exclusive
processes at intermediate and high energies,
quark degrees of freedom. Relativistic heavy
ion physics, high-temperature QCD, phase
transition, quark-gluon plasma. Nuclear
astrophysics.

E. Lomon

8.712 Advanced Topics in Nuclear
Physics

Prereq.: 8.711 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Medium-energy physics (Spring 1996):
Nuclear and nucleon structure and dynamics
studied with medium- and high-energy probes
(neutrinos, photons, electrons, nucleons,
pions, and kaons). Studies of the weak and
strong interactions.

Information: T. W. Donnelly.

Descriptions of Subjects 377


--- 03.pdf Page 15 ---
School of Science

8.731 Nuclear Physics Seminar

Prereq.: 8.322, 8.712

G (Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced seminar on current topics. Short

presentations by both experimentalists and
theorists. Emphasis varies yearly. Typical
topics: ultrarelativistic heavy-ion collisions;
quark models of nucleons, nuclei, and nucleon-
nucleon interaction; new observables in
electron scattering, using polarized beams,
polarized targets, and coincidence measure-
ments; recent experiments on relativistic
nucleon-nucleon scattering; developments in
many-body theory, including functional integral
and stochastic methods. Offered if sufficient in-
terest is indicated.

A. M. Bernstein

8.781, 8.782 Selected Topics in Nuclear
Theory

Prereq.: 8.323

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents topics of current interest in nuclear

structure and reaction theory, with content
varying from year to year. Subject not routinely
offered; given when sufficient interest is indi-
cated.

Information: J. W. Negele.

8.811 Particle Physics Il

Prereq.: 8.701
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of current research in High Energy
Physics. Topics include electron-positron and
proton-antiproton collisions; electroweak
phenomena, heavy flavor physics, and high-
precision tests of the Standard Model. Other
topics include searches for new phenomena
(compositeness, supersymmetry, GUTs). Dis-
cussion of our new experimental results (e.g.
the Top Quark) and also expectations from fu-
ture accelerators (B factory, LHC).

M. Chen

8.871, 8.872 Selected Topics in Theoretical
Particle Physics

Prereq.: 8.323

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Presents topics of current interest in theoreti-

cal particle physics, with content varying from
year to year. Subject not routinely offered;
given when sufficient interest is indicated.
Information: J. W. Negele.

8.881, 8.882 Selected Topics in
Experimental Particle Physics

Prereq.: 8.811

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Presents topics of current interest in ex-
perimental particle physics, with content vary-
ing from year to year. Subject not routinely
offered; given when sufficient interest is indi-
cated.

Information: W. Busza.

8.896J Supersymmetric Quantum Field
Theories

(Same subject as 18.396J)
Prereq.: 8.323

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 18.396J.
D. Z. Freedman

Space Physics and Astrophysics

8.901 Astrophysics |
Prereq.: 8.05, 8.06, 8.07

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Size and time scales. Historical astronomy.

Astronomical instrumentation. Stars: spectra
and classification. Stellar structure equations
and survey of stellar evolution. Stellar oscilla-
tions. Degenerate and collapsed stars; radio
pulsars. Interacting binary systems; accretion
disks, x-ray sources. Gravitational lenses; dark
matter. Interstellar medium: HII regions, super-
nova remnants, molecular clouds, dust; radia-
tive transfer; Jeans’ mass; star formation.
High-energy astrophysics: Compton scattering,
bremsstrahlung, synchrotron radiation, cosmic
rays. Galactic stellar distributions and popula-
tions; Oort constants; Oort limit; globular
clusters.

S. Rappaport

8.902 Astrophysics II

Prereq.: 8.911

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Galactic dynamics: potential theory, orbits, col-

lisionless Boltzmann equation, etc. Galaxy in-
teractions. Groups and clusters; dark matter.
Intergalactic medium; x-ray clusters. Active
galactic nuclei: unified models, black hole ac-
cretion, radio and optical jets, etc.
Homogeneity and isotropy, redshift, galaxy dis-
tance ladder. Newtonian cosmology.
Roberston-Walker models and cosmography.
Early universe, primordial nucleosynthesis,
recombination. Cosmic microwave background
radiation. Large-scale structure, galaxy forma-
tion

‘= Bertschinger

8.913 Plasma Astrophysics |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

8.914 Plasma Astrophysics Il

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

For students interested in space physics,
astrophysics, and plasma physics in general.
Magnetospheres of rotating magnetized
planets, ordinary stars, neutron stars, and
black holes. Pulsar models: processes for slow-
ing down, particle acceleration, and radiation
emission; accreting plasmas and x-ray stars;
stellar winds; heliosphere and solar wind:
relevant magnetic field configuration,
measured particle distribution in velocity space
and induced collective modes; stability of the
current sheet and collisionless processes for
magnetic reconnection; theory of collisionless
shocks; solitons; Ferroaro-Rosenbluth sheet;
solar flare models; heating processes of the
solar corona; earth’s magnetosphere (auroral
phenomena and their interpretation, bow-
shock, magnetotail, trapped particle effects);
relationship between gravitational (galactic)
plasmas and electromagnetic plasmas. 8.913
deals with heliospheric, 8.914 with extra-helios-
pheric plasmas.

B. Coppi

8.921 Stellar Structure and Evolution

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Observable stellar characteristics; overview of
observational information. Principles underly-
ing calculations of stellar structure. Physical
processes in stellar interiors; properties of mat-
ter and radiation; radiative, conductive, and
convective heat transport; nuclear energy
generation; nucleosynthesis; neutrino emis-
sion. Protostars; the main sequence, and the
solar neutrino flux; advanced evolutionary
stages; variable stars; planetary nebulae, su-
pernovae, white dwarfs, and neutron stars;
close binary systems; abundance of chemical
elements.

P. C. Joss

8.942 Cosmology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Thermal backgrounds in space. Cosmological
principle and its consequences: Newtonian
cosmology and types of “universes”; survey of
relativistic cosmology; horizons. Overview of
evolution in cosmology; radiation and element
synthesis; physical models of the “early
stages.” Formation of large-scale structure to
variability of physical laws. First and last
states. Some knowledge of relativity expected.
8.962 recommended though not required.

E. W. Bertschinger

378 Chapter Viil


--- 03.pdf Page 16 ---
Department of Physics Course 8

8.952 Particle Physics of the Early
Universe

Prereq.: 8.323, 8.324

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Thermal equilibrium states in quantum field
theories. Phase transitions and the fate of the
false vacuum. Homotopy theory and topologi-
cal defects: monopoles, strings, and domain
walls. The standard cosmological model. The
inflationary universe. Quantum field theory in
de Sitter space. Quantum origin of density fluc-
tuations in inflationary models.

U. Wiese

8.962 General Relativity

Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06, 8.06, 8.312 or
equivalents

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The basic principles of Einstein’s general
theory of relativity. Differential geometry. Ex-
perimental tests of general relativity. Black
holes. Cosmology.

8.971, 8.972 Astrophysics Seminar

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced seminar on current topics, with a dif-
ferent focus each semester. Typical topics:
gravitational lenses, active galactic nuclei,
neutron stars and pulsars, galaxy formation,
supernovae and supernova remnants, brown
dwarfs, and extrasolar planetary systems. The
presenter at each session is selected by draw-
ing names from a hat containing those of all at-
tendees. Offered if sufficient interest is
indicated.

Information: E. W. Bertschinger.

8.981, 8.982 Selected Topics in
Astrophysics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics of current interest, varying from year to
year. Subject not routinely offered; given when
sufficient interest is indicated.

Information: P. Schechter.

8.ThG Graduate Physics Thesis
Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member.

Information: G. F. Koster.

Descriptions of Subjects 379


--- 03.pdf Page 17 ---
School of Science

Course 9 Brain and Cognitive

Sciences

For degree requirements, see listing in

Chapter Vil under the School of Science.
9.UR Undergraduate Research 9.011J Principles of Neuroscience 9.029 Cellular Physiology
Prereq.: — (Same subject as 7.65J) Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring, Summer) Prereq.: Permission of instructor Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F] G (Fall) Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

Can be repeated for credit
9.URG Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual participation in an ongoing research

project.
Consult A. Hein.

9.00 Introduction to Psychology
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS-D, Category 4

A first course in psychology: how we think,
see, feel, learn, talk, act, grow, fear, love, hate,
lust, and find meaning. The great controver-
sies: nature and nurture, free will, conscious-
ness, human differences, self and society.
Largely laboratory and field studies of be-
havior, with relevant ideas from evolutionary
biology, genetics, brain science, philosophy,
economics, sociology, and the arts. Enrollment
may be limited.

S. Pinker

9.01 Neuroscience and Behavior
Prereq.: 9.62 or 9.00

U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST

Relation of structure and function at various

levels of neuronal integration. Topics include:
functional neuroanatomy and neurophysiology,
sensory and motor systems, centrally
programmed behavior, sensory systems, sleep
and dreaming, motivation and reward, emotion-
al displays of various types, “higher functions”
and the neocortex, and neural processes in
learning and memory.

G. E. Schneider

380 Chapter Vill

6-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of principles underlying the structure

and function of the nervous system, integrating
molecular, ceilular, systems, and computation-
al approaches. Topics: development, cell biol-
ogy of neurons, neurotransmitters and
synaptic transmission, sensory systems of the
brain, the neuroendocrine system, the motor
system, higher cortical functions, behavioral
and cellular analyses of learning and memory.
M. Sur, A. Graybiel, E. Bizzi, S. Corkin,

P. Schiller, R. J. Wurtman, W. Quinn,

M. Wilson, E. Miller, E. Adelson, H. Steller

9.02 Brain and Behavior Laboratory
(New)

Prereq.: 9.01

U (Spring)

1-5-6 Institute LAB

Consists of a series of “hands-on” laboratories

designed to give students experience with
common techniques for conducting neuros-
cience research. Included are sessions on
anatomical, ablation, neurophysiological, and
computer modeling techniques, and ways
these techniques are used to study brain func-
tion. Each session consists of a brief quiz on
assigned readings that provide background to
the lab, a lecture that expands on the read-
ings, and that week’s laboratory. Weekly lab
reports required.

E. Miller

9.021 Dynamic Neural Processing in the
Vertebrate Forebrain

Prereq.: 9.011J

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

There is increasing evidence that neural
processing is dynamic and subject to plastic
changes over time. Subject considers topics re-
lated to neuroplasticity in the forebrain. Brain
systems discussed include the cortex and
thalamus, the basal ganglia, and elements of
the limbic system. Short- and long-term chan-
ges in neuronal processing are considered. Al-
ternate years.

A. M. Graybiel

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on combined biochemical, molecular,
and biophysical approaches to investigate the
physiology of excitable membranes. Emphasis
is on structure, function, and regulation of
membrane ion channels. Alternate years.
Staff

9.03 Neural Basis of Learning and Memory

(Subject meets with 9.031)
Prereq.: 9.01

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9

9.031 Neural Basis of Learning and Memory

(Subject meets with 9.03)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics in mammalian learning and memory in-
cluding cellular mechanisms. Neural plasticity,
electrophysiology, behavior, and computation-
al approaches considered. Emphasis on
animal models of hippocampal mechanisms
and function. Lectures and discussion of
papers. An additional project is required for
graduate credit.

M. Wilson, P. Dayan

9.036 The Visual System

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews the current neurophysiological and
neuroanatomical research literature on the
mammalian visual system. Alternate years.
P. H. Schiller


--- 03.pdf Page 18 ---
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences Course 9

9.04 Neural Basis of Vision and Audition

Prereq.: 9.01 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9

Examines the neural bases of visual and
auditory processing for perception and sen-
sorimotor control. Focuses on physiological
and anatomical studies of the mammalian nerv-
ous system as well as behavioral studies of
animals and humans. Studies visual pattern,
color and depth perception, auditory respon-
ses and speech coding, and spatial localiza-
tion. Offered alternate years.

P. H. Schiller, J. Mazer

9.05 Neural Basis of Movement

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Surveys general principles and specific ex-
amples of motor control in biological systems.
Emphasizes the neural mechanisms underly-
ing different aspects of movement. Covers sen-
sory reception, reflex arcs, spinal cord
organization, pattern generators, muscle func-
tion, locomotion, and eye movement. Func-
tions of central motor structures including
cerebellum, basal ganglia, thalamus, and
cerebral cortex considered. Motor learning and
computational approaches to motor control are
discussed.

A. Graybiel, M. Sur, E. Bizzi, P. Schiller

9.06 Conflicting Images of Humanity
and Nature

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

More than five billion and growing, we humans
are straining the earth's natural resources to
an unprecedented extent. How do our views of
the world and its contents, including ourselves,
relate to our treatment of the environment, in-
cluding each other? We consider this question
in historical perspective and in the light of
recent developments in the natural and social
sciences.

S. L. Chorover

9.09J Cellular Neurobiology

(Same subject as 7.29J)

Prereq.: 7.05

U (Spring)

4-0-8

See description under subject 7.29J.
W. G. Quinn, H. Steller

9.10 Cognitive Neuroscience

(Subject meets with 9.100)
Prereq.: 9.01

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6

9.100 Cognitive Neuroscience

(Subject meets with 9.10)
Prereq.: 9.011J

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the relations between neural systems

and cognition, emphasizing vision, language,
motor control, memory, and emotion. Intro-
duces basic neuroanatomy, imaging techni-
ques, behavioral measures of cognition, and
computational models. Discusses methods by
which inferences about the brain bases of cog-
nition are made. Considers evidence from
patients with neurological diseases and from
normal human subjects. Demonstrations of
methods and case presentations. An addition-
al project is required for graduate credit.

S. Corkin

9.110J Neurology, Neuropsychology, and
Neurobiology of Aging
(New)

(Same subject as 7.92J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Lectures and discussion explore the clinical,

behavioral, and molecular aspects of brain
aging processes in humans. Topics include:
loss of sensory and motor function and loss of
memory and other cognitive abilitites in normal
aging; neurodegenerative conditions, such as
Parkinson's, Alzheimer’s, and Huntington's dis-
eases, and Down's syndrome. Based on lec-
tures, readings taken from the primary
literature, and discussions. Students are ex-
pected to present topics based on their read-
ings. One written mid-term test and one final

paper.
S. Corkin, V. Ingram

9.14 Development and Structure of the
Mammalian Brain

Prereq.: 9.01

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Early determination of brain subdivisions and

cell fates. Cell proliferation and migration.
Growth cone dynamics and molecular deter-
minants. Axon elongation, formation of major
tracts. Map formation and plasticity. Axon col-
latoral formation and regression; end-arbor
elaboration and synaptogenesis; shaping by
activity; cell death and trophic factors.
Regeneration and sprouting. Tissue culture
and gene knockout models.

G. E. Schneider

9.15 Biochemistry and Pharmacology of
Synaptic Transmission

(Subject meets with 9.150)

Prereq.: 9.01, 7.05, or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)

3-0-9

9.150 Biochemistry and Pharmacology of
Synaptic Transmission

(Subject meets with 9.15)

Prereq.: 9.011J or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Considers the process of neurotransmission,
especially chemicals used in the brain and
elsewhere to carry signals from nerve ter-
minals to the structures they innervate.
Focuses on monoamine transmitters (acetyl-
choline; serotonin; dopamine and
norepinephrine); also examines amino acid
and peptide transmitters and neuromodulators
like adenosine. Macromolecules that mediate
neurotransmitter synthesis, release, inactiva-
tion, and receptor-mediated actions are dis-
cussed, as well as factors that regulate their
activity and the second-messenger systems
they control. An additional project is required
for graduate credit.

R. J. Wurtman

9.20 Animal Behavior

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Reviews selected issues including learning,
cognition, perception, foraging and feeding,
migration and navigation, defense, and social
activities including conflict, collaboration,
courtship and reproduction, and communica-
tion. The interacting contributions of environ-
ment and heredity are examined and the
approaches of psychology, ethology, and ecol-
ogy to this area of study are treated. The rela-
tion of human behavior patterns to those of
nonhuman animals is explored.

A. Hein

9.201 Advanced Animal Behavior

Prereq.: 9.20 or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey and special topics designed for
graduate students in the brain and cognitive
sciences. Emphasizes ethological studies of
natural behavior and its analysis in laboratory
work, with contributions from field studies,
sociobiology, and comparative psychology.
Stresses mammalian behavior but also in-
cludes studies of other vertebrates and of in-
vertebrates. Discussions include human
ethology, applications to neuropsychology and
behavioral pharmacology, and welfare of cap-
tive animals. Alternate years.

G. E. Schneider

Descriptions of Subjects 381


--- 03.pdf Page 19 ---
School of Science

so SEU UEI

9.301J Neural Plasticity in Learning and
Development

(Same subject as 7.98J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 7.98J.
S. Tonegawa, W. Quinn, M. Wilson, H. Steller

9.322J Genetic Neurobiology

(Same subject as 7.67J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Deals with the specific functions of neurons,

the interactions of neurons in development,
and the organization of neuronal ensembles to
produce behavior, by functional analysis of
mutations and molecular analysis of their
genes. Concentrates on work with nematodes
and fruit flies. Alternate years.

W. G. Quinn, H. Steller

9.33 Methods in Neural Modeling
(New)

(Subject meets with 9.331)

Prereq.: 9.01, 9.03/9.031, 9.369, or permission
of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9

9.331 Methods in Neural Modeling
(New)

(Subject meets with 9.33)

Prereq.: 9.01, 9.03/9.031 or 9.369 or permis-
sion of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9

Reading, presentation, discussion and im-

plementation of biophysical and systems
models of invertebrate and vertebrate neural
computation. Computer simulation and/or
mathematical analysis forms an essential com-
ponent. Written presentation of a final project
is required for graduate credit.

M. Wilson, P. Dayan

9.34J Cognitive Architectures

(Same subject as MAS.234J, MAS.654)

Prereq.: 9.62 or 9.00
U (Fall)
3-0-6

The acquisition and communication of
knowledge demands a coherent cognitive
framework within which we can reason about
events and states in the world. What
frameworks are plausible, and how do these
choices affect our deductive and creative
processes? Material includes analog repre-
sentations, Bayesean nets, grammars, default
logics, belief theory, and discourse analysis.
W. A. Richards

382 Chapter Viil

9.35 Perceptual Information Processing

Prereq.: 9.62 or 9.00
U (Spring)
3-0-9

The senses are our gateways to the world.
Everything we know about what is going on
out there comes to us through vision, hearing,
touch, taste, smell. How do the senses work?
How do physical stimuli get transduced into sig-
nals in the nervous system? How can the brain
use those signals to determine the flavor of a
banana, the sound of a flute, or the shape of a
cow? All senses discussed. Vision is covered
most extensively. Includes perception of color,
motion, form and depth, and development.

E. H. Adelson, B. Anderson

9.358J Image Representations for Vision

(Same subject as MAS.626J)

Prereq.: MAS.510 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject MAS.626J.

E. H. Adelson, A. Pentland, A. Bobick

9.359J Special Topics in Vision Science

(Same subject as MAS.627J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

An advanced seminar on issues of current in-

terest in computational and biological vision.
Topics vary from year to year. Participants dis-
cuss the current literature as well as their own
ongoing research.

E. H. Adelson

9.363 Research in Natural Computation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Closely supervised research on a problem of
inferring a property of the world, given only
limited sensory data. Problems may be chosen
from the fields of vision, audition, or force sens-
ing (touch). The use of constraint in the in-
ference process is stressed, as well as the
exclusion of false inferences.

W. A. Richards

9.369 Computational Neuroscience
(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9

On the construction and use of computational
models in neuroscience. Focuses on systems-
level models of activity dependent develop-
ment and animal learning and involves
computational and mathematical investiga-
tions. A modeling project or paper is required
for credit.

P. Dayan

9.371 Advanced Seminar on Inference and
Learning

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reading and discussion of selected current
topics in inference and learning, with focus on
probabilistic approaches. Examples of topics
include exact and approximate inference in
Bayesian belief networks, chain graphs,
Markov chain Monte Carlo, information
geometry, Bayesian decision theory, reinforce-
ment learning and adaptive control.

M. Jordan

9.373 Somatosensory and Motor
Systems

Prereq.: 9.011J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General principles of motor control in biological
systems. Structure and function of sensory
receptors. Muscle structure and reflex arcs.
Spinal cord: descending and ascending path-
ways. Locomotion. Oculomotor control.
Cerebellar structure and function. Motor
thalamus. Basal ganglia. Somatosensory cor-
tex: maps and neuronal properties. Motor
psychophysics and computational approaches
to motor control. Alternate years.

E. Bizzi, M. Sur, A. Graybiel

9.382 Seminar on Information Processing

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and the application of learning, includ-
ing machine vision and biological vision.
Centers around ongoing work by participants
and presentations by them.

T. A. Poggio, M. Jordan

9.39 Computational Laboratory in
Cognitive Science

(Subject meets with 9.390)
Prereq.: 9.62, 6.001, and 18.06
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
0-6-6

9.390 Computational Laboratory in
Cognitive Science

(Subject meets with 9.39)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
0-6-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to computational modeling in
cognitive science. Case studies in perception,
memory, reasoning, language processing, and
action are used to introduce widely used com-
putational techniques and to evaluate par-
ticular models. Makes extensive use of
computer simulation, and previous experience
with computers is required. An additional
project is required for graduate credit. Alter-
nate years.

M. |. Jordan


--- 03.pdf Page 20 ---
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences Course 9

9.401 Survey of Cognitive Science
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Survey of theories, methods, and findings in

cognitive psychology and perception. Includes
perception and psychophysics, pattern recogni-
tion, imagery and mental codes, memory and
attention, and language hension and
production. Ordinarily restricted to Course IX
graduate students; permission of instructor re-
quired for others.

M. C. Potter, M. |. Jordan, K. Wexler,

E. Adelson, E. Gibson, R. Held, B. Anderson,
M. Wilson, E. Miller, P. Dayan, S. Pinker

9.50 Research in Brain and Cognitive
Sciences

Prereq.: 9.00 or 9.62; and one other subject in

Course IX

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
2-8-2 Institute LAB

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory research in brain and cognitive
science, using physiological, anatomical, phar-
macological, developmental, behavioral, and
computational methods. Each student carries
out an experimental study under the direction
of a member of the faculty. Project must be ap-
proved in advance by faculty supervisor and
either A. Hein or P. H. Schiller. Written presen-
tation of results is required.

Consult A. Hein or P. H. Schiller.

9.520 Learning, Approximation, and
Networks

Prereq.: 9.01, 9.35, 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Study of the problem of learning from ex-

amples, from the perspective of statistics and
of the theory of multivariate function ap-
proximation from sparse data. Examines ap-
plications in the field of computer vision,
computer graphics, time-series analysis and
prediction, and adaptive control. Also con-
siders implications for how the brain may work,
in particular for the neurobiology of object
recognition.

T. Poggio, F. Girosi

9.59J Psycholinguistics

(Same subject as 24.905J)
Prereq.: 9.62 or 24.900J

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Central topics in first language acquisition and

real-time language comprehension. How does
a child acquire language despite impoverished
output? What makes language easy or hard to
understand? Experimental methodology and
explicit models are discussed. An emphasis on
the relation of linguistic principles to the
problems of language acquisition and real-time
processing. Discussion of computational
modeling.

E. Gibson, K. Wexler

9.591 Language Processing

Prereq.: 9.59J, 9.401, or permission of instruc-
tor

G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar in real-time language comprehension.

Formal models of sentence processing from
the linguistic, psychology, and artificial intel-
ligence literature. Ambiguity resolution. Linguis-
tic complexity. The use of lexical, syntactic,
semantic, pragmatic, and contextual informa-
tion in language comprehension, The
psychological reality of linguistic repre-
sentations.

E. Gibson

9.601J Language Acquisition |

(Same subject as 24.949J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Lectures, reading, and discussion of current

theory and data concerning the psychology
and biology of language acquisition. Em-
phasizes learning of syntax and morphology,
and especially research relating grammatical
theory and learnability theory to empirical
studies of children.

K. Wexler

9.602J Language Acquisition Il

(Same subject as 24,950J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continues discussion of topics described

under 9.601J.
K. Wexler

9.611J Natural Language and the Computer
Representation of Knowledge

(Same subject as 6.863J)
Prereq.: 6.034

G (Spring)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.863J.
R. C. Berwick

9.62 Introduction to Cognitive Science

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Surveys major issues that occupy contem-

porary cognitive science. Topics include visual
perception, memory, thinking and reasoning,
language and communication.

M. C. Potter, E. Gibson

9.63 Laboratory in Cognitive Science

(Subject meets with 9.631)
Prereq.: 9.62

U (Spring)

3-6-3 Institute LAB

9.631 Laboratory in Cognitive Science

(Subject meets with 9.63)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the principles of experimental
design and interpretation in cognitive psychol-
ogy, including an overview of inferential statis-
tics and analyses of common sources of
artifact. Demonstration of experiments in a
number of areas of cognitive science. Stu-
dents design, execute, and write up an experi-
ment of their own. Graduate students required
to do additional reading and more technically
demanding assignments.

B. Anderson

9.641 Introduction to Neural Networks

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Study of representation, processing, and adap-
tation in highly interconnected networks of
simple analog processing units. Explores basic
algorithms, including backpropagation,
Boltzmann machines, mixtures of experts,
recurrent algorithms, hidden Markov models,
and junction tree propagation. Emphasizes the
ties to dynamical systems and statistics. Ap-
plications to models of memory, perception,
reasoning, and motor control.

M. |. Jordan

9.65 Cognitive Processes

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

An introduction to human information process-
ing and learning; topics include the nature of
mental representation and processing; the ar-
chitecture of memory; pattern recognition; im-
agery and mental codes; concepts and
prototypes; reasoning and problem solving.
Staff

9.651 Cognitive Processes

Prereq.: 9.62, 9.65, or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys major issues and basic findings in
human cognitive processing. Topics include
pattern recognition, word perception, the ar-
chitecture of memory, mental codes, learning,
and attention, in addition to special topics of
current interest. Alternate years.

M. C. Potter

Descriptions of Subjects 383


--- 03.pdf Page 21 ---
School of Science

TT — — ——— — —  — ———— —h— SO _

9.671J Problems of Mental
Representation

(Same subject as 24.518J)

Prereq.: Two Philosophy subjects and permis-
sion of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 24.518J,
R. Stalnaker

9.68 Affect: Biological, Psychological, and
Social Aspects of “Feelings”

Prereq.: 9.00
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Affect is to cognition and behavior as feeling is

to thinking and acting or as values are to
beliefs and practices. Subject considers these
relations, both at the psychological level of or-
ganization and in terms of their neurobiological
and sociocultural counterparts.

S. L. Chorover

9.70 Social Psychology
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Examines interpersonal and group dynamics,

considers how the thoughts, feelings, and ac-
tions of individuals are influenced by (and in-
fluence) the beliefs, values, and practices of
large and small groups. Learning occurs main-
ly through class discussions and participation
in study groups. Regular homework assign-
ments, occasional lectures, and demonstra-
tions.

S. L. Chorover

9.75J Psychology of Gender

(Same subject as SP.460J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Examines evidence (and lack thereof) regard-

ing when and how an individual's thoughts,
feelings, and actions are affected by gender.
Topics include: gender development; gender
differences in cognition and emotion; gender
stereotypes; how gender is related to physical
and mental health, sexuality, close relation-
ships, and work.

M. Parlee

9.85 Developmental Psychology
Prereq.: 9.00 or 9.62

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

An introduction to the literature on human

development. Some attention to social and
emotional development; major focus on cogni-
tive development. Empirical research on such
theoretical issues as the nativist/empiricist
debate and the nature of qualitative changes
during development reviewed. Some applica-
tions of research to educational issues also dis-
cussed. ‘

L. Spelke

9.88 Origins of Behavior

Prereq.: 9.00 or 9.62
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Examines our evolving understanding of the

prenatal, infant, and early post-infant periods.
Addresses the interaction of innate and en-
vironmental factors in the development of intel-
ligence, learning ability, perception, motor
activities including vocalization, and social in-
teractions in humans. Considers their relation
to similar capacities in other animals, em-
phasizing the primates.

A. Hein

9.891 Cognitive Development

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys recent research in cognitive develop-

ment. Topics include constraints on induction,
knowledge representation and reorganization,
cognition in infancy, semantic development,
and conceptual change. Alternate years.

L. Spelke

9.91 Topics in Cognitive Sciences

Prereq.: 9.00 or 9.62 and any other two

subjects in Brain and Cognitive Sciences
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual study of a special topic under the

direction of a member of the faculty.
Consult A. Hein.

9.911-9.916 Special Topics in Brain and
Cognitive Sciences

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for graduate study of advanced

subjects in Brain and Cognitive Sciences not
included in other subject listings. 9.911 is
taught P/D/F.

Consult M. C. Potter or G. E. Schneider.

9.919 Teaching Brain and Cognitive
Sciences

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For teaching assistants in Brain and Cognitive

Sciences, in cases where teaching assignment
is approved for academic credit by the depart-
ment.

M. C. Potter, G. E. Schneider

9.921 Research in Brain and Cognitive
Sciences

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Guided research under the sponsorship of in-
dividual members of the faculty. Ordinarily
restricted to candidates for the doctoral degree
in Course IX.

Consult M. C. Potter or G. H. Schneider.

9.93-9.99 Independent Activities

Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates taking Course 9 IAP sub-
jects for credit. See |AP Guide for details.
Consult A. Hein.

9.931 Research Reports

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

0-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Course IX graduate students submit written
reports of their research efforts according to
stated deadlines. Registration is mandatory in
fall term of third year and in term when thesis
proposal is to be submitted.

Consult M. C. Potter or G. E. Schneider.

9.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of a Ph.D. thesis; to be arranged by the
student and an appropriate MIT faculty mem-
ber.

Psychology

The undergraduate program in Psychology
is described in Chapter 7. For additional re-
lated subjects in Psychology, see also:

Architecture: 4.265

Brain and Cognitive Sciences: 9.00, 9.01,
9.06, 9.09J, 9.10, 9.20, 9.201, 9.35, 9.39,
9.59J, 9.601J, 9.62, 9.63, 9.641, 9.65, 9.68,
9.70, 9.75J, 9.85, 9.88

Management: 15.301, 15.310, 15.312,
15.313, 15.341, 15.361, 15.665, 15.824,
15.832

Humanities: 21H.966J

Science, Technology, and Society:
STS.060J, STS.518J

384 Chapter VIII


--- 03.pdf Page 22 ---
Course 10

Department of Chemical Engineering Course 10
essen ronson io ee gis

Chemical Engineering

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.

10.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

10.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for participation in a research

group, or for special investigation in a par-
ticular field. Topic and hours to fit individual re-

10.ThU Undergraduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of undergraduate research, leading
to writing an S.B. thesis; topic arranged be-
tween student and MIT faculty member.

C. M. Mohr

10.001 Introduction to Computer Methods

Introduction to computers in chemical en-
gineering and to the Athena computer environ-
ment. Exposure to methods for text and
picture creation and manipulation, symbolic
computing, numerical programming in C, and
elementary methods for numerical analysis.

G. C. Rutledge

10.02J Biotechnology and Engineering
(Same subject as 5.22J, TOX.105J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

4-0-5

See description under subject 5.22J.

J. M. Essigmann, R. S. Langer

10.100 Interdisciplinary Research in
Biomedical Engineering
(New)

Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05, 7.06 or 7.08, 18.03,

2.003 or 3.185 or 6.001 or 10.301 or
16.030/16.040

U (Fall, Spring)

1-2-3

Can be repeated for credit

Individual research work in biomedical en-
gineering not covered by other subjects.
Project must integrate biology and engineering
or medicine and engineering. Approval of the
CBE Curriculum committee required. Students
must enroll for at least 12 units in the term the
work is done in order to receive credit as a
restricted elective in the BME Minor. Consult
the departmental BME Minor advisor early in
the term. Can be used to fulfill Phase II.

L. G. Cima

10.11 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00
U (Spring)
3-1-8

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
F. Pefia-Mora ,

10.200 Sophomore Advising Seminar

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Special topics in chemical engineering
designed to help acquaint and orient new stu-
dents to the field. All sophomores beginning in
chemical engineering are encouraged to take
this seminar.

C. L. Cooney

10.21 Structures and Properties of Matter

Prereq.: 5.11, 5.60, 10.001
U (Fall)
3-0-6

Atomic and molecular interactions and their im-

portance in determining physical and chemical
properties of matter. Dielectric properties of
materials. Description of physical and specific
chemical intermolecular forces, including
hydrogen bonds, Bulk and interfacial proper-
ties of pure and mixed gases and liquids. Tech-
niques for characterizing molecular structure
and for predicting properties of matter.

C. K. Colton

10.213 Chemical Engineering
Thermodynamics

Prereq.: 5.60, 10.001
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8

Thermodynamics of multicomponent, multi-
phase systems. Applications of first, second,
and third laws of thermodynamics to open and
closed systems. Properties of mixtures, includ-
ing colligative properties, chemical reaction
equilibrium, and phase equilibrium; non-ideal
solutions; power cycles; refrigeration; separa-
tion systems.

D. Blankschtein, K. K. Gleason, T. A. Hatton,
P. E. Laibinis, H. H. Sawin

10.25 Industrial Chemistry and Chemical
Process Pathways

Prereg.: 5.11, 10.213, 10.37
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Chemical and engineering principles involved
in creation and operation of viable industrial
processes. Topics: analysis of process
chemistry by p-pathways (i.e., radical, ionic,
and pericyclic reactions of organic syntheses)
and d-pathways (i.e., catalysis by transition-
metal complexes). Use of reaction
mechanisms for inference of co-product forma-
tion, kinetics, and equilibria: process synthesis
logic related to reaction selectivity, recycle,
separations. Illustrations drawn from current
and contemplated commercial practice.

P. S. Virk

10.26 Chemical Engineering Projects
Laboratory
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 10.302
U (Fall, Spring)
1-8-3

Laboratory projects in applied chemical re-
search and unit operations. Students work in
groups on one project for the term. Projects
are often suggested by local industry. Training
in research planning, execution of experimen-
tal work, oral presentations, and report writing.
C. K. Colton, J.-F. Hamel, P. E. Laibinis,

R. S. Langer, H. H. Sawin,

G. N. Stephanopoulos

Descriptions of Subjects 385


--- 03.pdf Page 23 ---
School of Engineering

10.27 Chemical Engineering Processes
Laboratory

Prereq.: 10.32, 10.37
U (Fall)
0-8-4

Introduces practical chemical engineering unit

operations through hands-on experience with
pilot-scale equipment and processes. Intended
to provide instruction in experimentation and
data analysis. Introduces theory of selected
unit operations. Emphasis on developing oral
and written communication skills.

J.-F. Hamel, J. B. Howard

10.301 Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 18.03, 10.001
U (Spring)
3-0-9 REST

Introduces the mechanical principles govern-

ing fluid flow. Stress in a fluid. Conservation of
mass and momentum, using differential and in-
tegral balances. Elementary constitutive equa-
tions. Hydrostatics. Exact solutions of the
Navier-Stokes equations. Approximate solu-
tions using control volume analysis. Mechani-
cal energy balances and Bernoulli’s equation.
Dimensional analysis and dynamic similarity.
Introduces boundary-layer theory and tur-
bulence.

W. M. Deen, P. S. Virk

10.302 Transport Processes
Prereq.: 5.60, 10.301

U (Fall)

4-0-8

Principles of heat and mass transfer. Steady

and transient conduction and diffusion. Con-
vective transport of heat and mass in both
laminar and turbulent flows. Natural convec-
tion. Condensation and boiling. Application to
design of heat exchangers. Radiative heat
transfer.

L. G. Cima, K. A. Smith, Gr. Stephanopoulos

10.31 Separations and the Environment

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6

Separations technology as applied to environ-

mental remediation and pollution control.
Sources of pollution and contaminated environ-
ments: industrial effluents and emissions,
domestic sources, run-offs, in the atmosphere,
surface water, ground water, and soils. Chemi-
cal and physical properties of pollutants, par-
titioning and distribution in the environment.
Separations involving dilute aqueous streams,
gas mixtures, recoverable organic products. /n
situ remediation of contaminated waste sites.
T. A. Hatton

10.32 Separation Processes
Prereq.: 10.213, 10.302

U (Spring)

3-0-9

General principles of separation by equilibrium

and rate processes. Staged cascades. Applica-
tions to distillation, absorption, adsorption, and
membrane processes. Phase equilibria and
role of diffusion.

C. M. Mohr

10.33 Analytical Treatment of Chemical
Engineering Transport Processes

Prereq.: 10.301, 18.03
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mathematical techniques underlying transport

problems basic to most chemical engineering
processes. Quaternions, vectors, polyadics,
Cartesian tensors, general tensors, curvilinear
coordinate systems. Representations of rota-
tion and orientation. Anisotropic material ten-
sor properties. Applications to the derivation of
transport equations in physical space, at inter-
faces, along lines, and in multidimensional
phase spaces.

H. Brenner

10.331 Nonlinear Analysis in Chemical
Engineering

Prereq.: 10.50
G (Spring)
3-0-6

Emphasizes both classical and modern
methods for analyzing nonlinear ordinary and
partial differential equations arising in reaction
engineering and transport phenomena. Topics:
elementary stability theory and bifurcation
analysis of steady states; introduction to time-
periodic phenomena and transitions to chaos;
numerical methods for tracking multiple-steady
and time-periodic states.

R. A. Brown

10.332 Linear Operator Theory in Chemical
Engineering Science

Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06, or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6

Introduction to linear operator theory. Set

theory, metric and linear spaces. Inner product
and Hilbert spaces, orthogonality, adjoint and
self-adjoint operators, spectral representation
theory, Green's functions, and Sturm-Liouville
operators. Applications to problems in partial
differential equations and control theory.

T. A. Hatton, R. A. Brown

10.34 Numerical Methods Applied to
Chemical Engineering

Prereq.: 10.33
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Numerical methods for solving problems aris-
ing in heat and mass transfer, fluid mechanics,
and chemical reaction engineering. Topics:
numerical linear algebra, solution of nonlinear
algebraic equations and ordinary differential
equations, and finite-difference and finite-ele-
ment methods for elliptic and parabolic partial
differential equations. All methods presented
in context of problems arising in transport
phenomena. Lectures and assignments as-
sume knowledge of FORTRAN.

R. A. Brown i

10.341 Finite Element Methods for
Problems in Transport Phenomena

Prereq.: 10.34
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced methods for solving problems in
fluid mechanics and heat and mass transfer.
Emphasis on efficient techniques for handling
highly irregular boundaries, nonlinearities, com-
plicated boundary conditions, and singularities.
Variational, Galerkin, and collocation schemes
discussed.

R. A. Brown

10.37 Chemical Kinetics and Reactor
Design

Prereq.: 5.60, 10.301
U (Spring)
3-0-6

Introduces design of commercial chemical
reactors, emphasizing synthesis of chemical
kinetics, transport phenomena. Topics: kinetics
and equilibrium — elementary steps, transition-
state theory, multistep reactions. Ideal
reactors — batch, plug flow, well-stirred;
residence-time distributions. Transport in reac-
tors — heat and mass transfer, diffusion to
and within catalyst particles. Reactor design;
reactor size; modeling of performance.

C. L. Cooney, J. Y. Ying

10.390 Process Design

Prereq.: 5.11, 10.213, 10.301
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Presentation and discussion of process design
case studies, selected from a variety of areas
in which chemical engineers work. Emphasis
on the applications of engineering science to
the solution of real problems, including concep-
tual design and analysis leading to optimal
solutions. Discussion of the trade-offs inherent
in design, including economics, environmental
impact, and contextual issues. Review of re-
quired engineering science and presentation
of the basics of process economics.

C. M. Mohr

386 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 24 ---
Department of Chemical Engineering Course 10

10.40 Chemical Engineering
Thermodynamics

Prereq.: 5.60 or equivalent
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic postulates of classical thermodynamics.
Application to transient open and closed sys-
tems. Criteria of stability and equilibria. Ther-
modynamic properties of pure materials and
mixtures. Phase and chemical equilibria of mul-
ticomponent systems. Applications em-
phasized through extensive problem work
relating to practical cases.

D. Blankschtein, J. W. Tester

10.42 Advanced Thermodynamics

Prereq.: 10.40
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Equilibrium and stability concepts examined in
depth for multicomponent, multiphase sys-
tems. Equations of state for pure components
and mixtures, solution models for mixtures of
electrolytes and non-electrolytes. Surface ther-
modynamics, statistical thermodynamics and
Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics applica-
tions comprise other topics.

J. W. Tester, D. Blankschtein

10.420 Molecular Aspects of Chemical
Engineering

(Subject meets with 10.520)
Prereq.: 5.13, 10.213, or equivalent
U (Fall)

3-0-6

Meets with graduate subject 10.520, but as-
signments differ. See description under subject
10.520.

P. E. Laibinis, P. T. Hammond

10.421 Heterogeneous Catalysis and
Catalytic Processes

(Subject meets with 10.521)
Prereq.: 5.13, 10.37 or equivalents
U (Fall)

3-0-6

Meets with graduate subject 10.521, but as-
signments differ. See description under subject
10.521.

J. Y. Ying

10.43 Introduction to Interfacial Phenomena

Prereq.: 10.213 or an equivalent introductory
subject in thermodynamics or physical
chemistry

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-6

Introduces fundamental and applied aspects of
interfacial phenomena. Theory of capillarity.
Experimental determination of interfacial ten-
sion. Thermodynamics of interfaces. The
Gibbs adsorption equation. Surface tension of
pure liquids and solutions. Surface films. Wet-
ting and contact angles. Effect of curvature on
the equilibrium state of pure systems and mix-
tures. Fundamentals of adsorption, micelliza-
tion, solubilization, and emulsification.

D. Blankschtein

10.44J Statistical Thermodynamics of
Complex Liquids

(Same subject as 22.52J, 8.575J)
Prereq.: 8.08, 10.213, or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.52J.
D. Blankschtein, S. H. Chen

10.441J Molecular and Engineering
Aspects of Biotechnology

(Same subject as 7.37J)
Prereq.: 7.03 or 7.05, 5.60

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8

See description under subject 7.37J.
D. 1. C. Wang, H. Lodish

10.442 Biochemical Engineering
(New)

(Subject meets with 10.542)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8

Meets with graduate subject 10.542, but as-

signments differ. See description for 10.542.
C. L. Cooney, D. |. C. Wang

10.445 Separation Processes for
Biochemical Products
(New)

(Subject meets with 10.545)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6

Meets with graduate subject 10.545, but as-

signments differ. See description for 10.545.
C. L. Cooney

10.450 Process Dynamics, Operations, and
Control

(Subject meets with 10.550)
Prereq.: 10.32, 10.37, 18.03
U (Spring)

3-0-6

Meets with graduate subject 10.550, but as-

signments differ. See description under subject
10.550.
Geo. Stephanopoulos

10.467 Polymer Science Laboratory

Prereq.: 5.12 or equivalent
U (Fall, Spring)
2-7-3 Institute LAB

Experiments broadly aimed at acquainting stu-
dents with the range of properties of polymers,
methods of synthesis, and physical chemistry.
Examples: solution polymerization of
acrylamide, bead polymerization of divinylben-
zene, interfacial polymerization of nylon 6,10,
derivitization of formed polymers (amylose to
amylose triacetate). Evaluation of elastic net-
works by tensile and swelling experiments; of
linear polymers by gel permeation chromatog-
raphy and light scattering. Relation of ob-
served properties to specific conditions of
synthesis, or choice of route of synthesis.

P. T. Hammond, E. W. Merrill, G. C. Rutledge

10.470J Environment and Technology

(Subject meets with 1.10J, 10.570J, TPP.52J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-6

Meets with subjects 1.10J, 10.570J, and
TPP.52J; but assignments differ. See descrip-
tion under subject 1.10J.

P. Gschwend, J. Ehrenfeld, A. Sarofim

10.471 Introduction to Air Pollution

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6

History of air pollution. Criteria for anticipating
environmental problems, indoor air, risk as-
sessment, plume dispersion, stationary com-
bustion sources, acid rain, NOx and SOx
emissions and their control. Smog formation
models. CO, HC, and NOx emissions from in-
ternal combustion engines. Particulate emis-
sions from internal combustion engines.
Particulate emissions and controls. Assess-
ment of global warming and strategies for con-
trol. Stratospheric ozone and air toxics. Limits
to growth: resource consumption and popula-
tion mementum.

A. F. Sarofim

10.480J Microelectronics Processing
Technology

(Same subject as 6.152J, 3.155J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

3-4-5

See description under subject 6.152J.
K. K. Gleason, H. H. Sawin, M. A. Schmidt,
C. G. Sodini, C. V. Thompson, L. C. Kimerling

10.490 Integrated Chemical Engineering |

Prereq.: 10.32, 10.37
U (Fall)
4-0-8

Presents and solves chemical engineering
problems in an industrial context. Emphasis is
placed on the integration of fundamental con-
cepts with approaches of process design.
Problems are emphasized that demand syn-
thesis, economic analysis, and process design.
Geo. Stephanopoulos, G. J. McRae,

C. M. Mohr, P. |. Barton

Descriptions of Subjects 387


--- 03.pdf Page 25 ---
School of Engineering

10.491 Integrated Chemical Engineering Il

Prereq.: 10.490
U (IAP, Spring)
4-0-8

Three modules present and solve chemical en-
gineering problems in an industrial context.
Emphasis placed on integration of fundamen-
tals with material property estimation, process
control, product development, and computer
simulation. Integration of societal issues, such
as engineering ethics, environmental and
safety considerations, and impact of technol-
ogy on society are addressed in the context of
case studies. One module may be taken
during IAP.

P. |. Barton, R. S. Langer, D. A. Lauffenburger,
G. C. Rutledge, A. F. Sarofim, H. H. Sawin,
Gr. Stephanopoulos

10.50 Analysis of Heat and Mass Transfer

Prereq.: 10.302
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes diffusive and convective transport of
heat and mass. Analytical solutions to steady-
state and transient diffusion or conduction
problems. Forced and free convection of heat
and mass in laminar flow. Simultaneous heat
and mass transfer with chemical reaction or
phase change.

R. C. Armstrong, W. M. Deen, H. Brenner,

T. A. Hatton

10.52 Mechanics of Fluids

Prereq.: 10.50
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced course in fluid and continuum
mechanics. Content may vary, drawing from
such topics as low Reynolds number
hydrodynamics, Brownian motion, suspension
mechanics, flow in porous media, multi-
phase/particulate flow, ideal fluid theory,
laminar boundary-layer theory, stability theory,
and turbulence.

K. A. Smith

10.520 Molecular Aspects of Chemical
Engineering

(Subject meets with 10.420)
Prereq.: 5.13, 10.213, or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Molecular-level engineering and analysis of
chemical processes. Use of chemical bonding,
reactivity, and other key concepts in the design
and tailoring of organic systems. Application
and development of structure-property relation-
ships to examples of adhesion, wetting, solva-
tion, and adsorption. Descriptions of the
chemical forces, recognition events, and struc-
tural ordering factors that govern
supramolecular phenomena such as crystal-
lization and phase equilibria.

P. E. Laibinis, P. T. Hammond

10.521 Heterogeneous Catalysis and
Catalytic Processes

(Subject meets with 10.421)
Prereq.: 5.13, 10.37, or equivalents
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to applied catalysis, focusing
on principles of importance in the development
and improvement of catalysts and their practi-
cal use in industry. Topics include adsorption
phenomena, catalyst preparation, and surface
characterization techniques. Application of
catalyst functionality concepts for control of
reaction selectivity and kinetic models. Com-
monality of mechanisms for significant groups
of catalyzed reactions such as hydrogenation,
partial oxidation, and hydrocarbon reactions
catalyzed by solid acids and zeolites. Control
of pollutant emissions by catalysis. Meets with
undergraduate subject 10.421, but assign-
ments differ.

J. Y. Ying

10.531 Macromolecular Hydrodynamics

Prereq.: 10.301

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Observed phenomena in polymeric flow sys-
tems. Techniques of viscometry and viscoelas-
tic measurements for polymeric fluids.
Rheological models. Continuum theories.
Molecular theories of polymeric fluids. Analyti-
cal solutions to flow problems; non-Newtonian
viscosity, linear viscoelasticity, normal
stresses, recoil, stress relaxation.

R. C. Armstrong

10.534 Macrotransport Processes

Prereq.: 10.50
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Generalized Taylor dispersion theory applied
to chromatographic separation processes, flow
and transport in porous media, transport
properties of macromolecular solutions, and
generic analyses of heterogeneous systems,
including adsorption phenomena, thermal
transport processes, and chemically reactive
continua.

H. Brenner

10.535 Interfacial Transport Processes and
Rheology

Prereq.: 10.50 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the theory and applications of
liquid-liquid interfacial transport phenomena.
General tensor analysis; interfacial statics;
kinematics, and transport across and within
curved, deforming interfaces; two-dimensional
momentum transport processes, Newtonian
and non-Newtonian interfacial stress constitu-
tive relations, applications to surface rheology;
surfactant transport and adsorption at inter-
faces, surface diffusion, Marangoni
phenomena, interphase mass transfer;
asymptotic theory of diffuse interfaces; line ten-
sion phenomena.

H. Brenner

10.540 Cell Bioengineering

Prereq.: 18.03

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of mammalian cell function from a
quantitative, engineering perspective, focusing
on receptor-mediated behavior and underlying
receptor/igand interactions. Topics include
receptor/ligand binding; receptor/ligand traffick-
ing; physical aspects of receptor ligand interac-
tions (probability, diffusion, multivalency);
signal transduction; cell proliferation; cell ad-
hesion; cell migration.

D. A. Lauffenburger

10.542 Biochemical Engineering

(10.541)

(Subject meets with 10.442)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Interaction of chemical engineering,
biochemistry, and microbiology. Mathematical
representations of microbial systems. Kinetics
of growth, death, and metabolism. Continuous
fermentation, agitation, mass transfer, and
scale-up in fermentation systems, enzyme
technology.

C. L. Cooney, D. |. C. Wang

10.543J The Protein Folding Problem
(New)

(Same subject as 7.88J, 5.48J)
Prereq.: 5.07 or 7.05 or equivalent
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 7.88J.
J. A. King

10.545 Separation Processes for
Biochemical Products

(Subject meets with 10.445)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to fundamental principles of
separation operations for the recovery of
products from biological processes, membrane
filtration, chromatography, centrifugation, cell
disruption, extraction, and process design.

C. L. Cooney

i

388 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 26 ---
10.546J Principles and Methodologies of
Metabolic Engineering

(Same subject as 7.546J)

Prereq.: 7.05 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6

Application of chemical reaction engineering

principles and genetic engineering techniques
to the analysis and modification of metabolic
pathways of microorganisms and mammalian
cells. The goal is to optimize flux distributions
of carbon and energy at critical junctions of the
metabolic network in order to enhance product
synthesis. Topics include: determination of flux
distributions in primary metabolism by
stoichiometric and labelling techniques;
kinetics and thermodynamics of metabolic net-
works; metabolic control theory; genetic en-
gineering techniques for the overexpression,
deregulation, or inhibition of targeted en-
zymes; biochemistry and enzymology of meta-
bolic networks.

Gr. Stephanopoulos, A. J. Sinskey

10.547J Health Technology

(Same subject as 15.136J, HST.920J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.136J.
S. N. Finkelstein, C. L. Cooney

10.548J Transport Phenomena and Tumor
Pathophysiology

(Same subject as HST.525J)

Prereq.: 18.03; 2.20 or 10.301 or equivalent
G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject HST.525J.

R. K. Jain

10.549 Tissue Engineering

Prereq.: 10.302 or equivalent,
7.012/7.013/7.014

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6

Analysis of fundamental processes in tissue

engineering for human therapeutic applica-
tions. Overview of major approaches in tissue
engineering (cell encapsulation, cell transplan-
tation, matrix-guided regeneration, extracor-
poreal reactors) and focus on specific tissues
representative of applications in regenerating
metabolic tissues (@.g., liver, pancreas) and
connective tissues (@.g., bone, cartilage). Cel-
lular nutrient metabolism, cell regulation by
macromolecules, and transport limitations in
device design. Guided organization of multicel-
lular structures. Regulatory issues and current
Clinical prospects.

L. G. Cima, W. M. Deen

Department of Chemical Engineering Course 10

10.55 Colloid and Surfactant Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to theory and applications of col-
loidal dispersions and surfactant science.
Monolayer adsorption at interfaces, electrical
double layers, dispersion forces, electrokinetic
phenomena, and stabilization of dispersions.
Chemistry, structure, and classification of sur-
factants, critical micelle concentrations, micel-
lar solubilization, and catalysis. Detergency
and wetting phenomena. Emulsion technology
and applications.

T. A. Hatton

10.550 Process Dynamics, Operations, and
Control

(Subject meets with 10.450)
Prereq.: 10.32, 10.37, 18.03
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to modeling and analysis of
dynamic processes and the engineering tasks
of process operations and control. Subject
covers the following topics: incentives for
process monitoring, analysis, and control;
modeling the static and dynamic behavior of
processes; control strategies; design of feed-
back, feedforward, and other control struc-
tures; model-predictive, inferential, and
adaptive control systems; digital computer con-
trol process identification; fault diagnosis and
supervisory control; computer-integrated
manufacturing and industrial practice of
process control. Meets with undergraduate
subject 10.450, but assignments differ.

Geo. Stephanopoulos

10.551 Systems Engineering
Prereq.: 10.213, 10.302, 10.37
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the elements of systems en-

gineering. Special attention devoted to those
tools that help students structure and solve
complex problems. Illustrative examples drawn
from a broad variety of chemical engineering
topics, including product development and
design, process development and design, ex-
perimental and theoretical analysis of physico-
chemical process, analysis of process
operations, etc.

G. J. McRae, Geo. Stephanopoulos, P. |. Bar-
ton

10.560 Structure and Properties of Polymers

Prereq.: 10.213 or permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Review of polymer molecular structure and
bulk morphology; survey of molecular and mor-
phological influence on bulk physical proper-
ties including non-Newtonian flow,
macromolecular diffusion, gas transport in
polymers, electrical and optical properties,
solid-state deformation, and toughness. Case
studies for product design.

R. E. Cohen

10.561 Molecular and Phenomenological

Interpretation of Polymer
Viscoelasticity

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and phenomenology of linear viscoelas-
tic behavior of polymers. Material functions

and their interconversion, model repre-
sentation, time-temperature equivalence.
Reviews molecular theories. Introduces non-
linear viscoelasticity.

R. E. Cohen

10.568 Physical Chemistry of Polymers

Prereq.: 5.60 or 10.213 or 10.40
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Chain macromolecules as random coils (unper-
turbed, expanded) and as other shapes. Statis-
tical thermodynamics of interpenetrating
random coiling polymers in solution with ap-
plication to phase separations, swelling of net-
works, depression of melting point. The
isolated chain molecule in dilute solutions
analyzed for mass or size by static methods
(osmometry, light scattering, neutron scatter-
ing) and by dynamic methods (intrinsic vis-
cosity, size exclusion chromatography,
sedimentation).

R. E. Cohen

10.569 Synthesis of Polymers

Prereq.: 5.12
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies synthesis of polymeric materials, em-
phasizing interrelationships of chemical path-
way, process conditions, and
“microarchitecture” of molecules produced.
Chemical pathway: anionic, radical, condensa-
tion, ring-opening. Process conditions: bulk,
solution, emulsion, suspension, gas phase,
batch vs continuous fluidized bed. “Microar-
chitecture”: tacticity, molecular-weight distribu-
tion, sequence distributions in copolymers,
“errors” in chains such as branches, head-to-
head addition, peroxide incorporation.

E. W. Merrill, P. T. Hammond

10.570J Chemicals in the Environment:
Sources and Control

(Subject meets with 1.10J, 10.470J, TPP.52J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Meets with subjects 1.10J, 10.470J, and
TPP.52J. Graduate credit based on two term
projects. See description under subject 1.10J.
A. F. Sarofim, J. R. Ehrenfeld, P. Gschwend

Descriptions of Subjects 389


--- 03.pdf Page 27 ---
School of Engineering

10.571J Air Pollution Control

(Same subject as 2.29J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Common and particulate air pol-
lutants and their environmental effects. Model-
ing of atmospheric chemical and physical
processes that disperse, transport, transform,
and remove air pollutants on local, regional,
and global scales. Formation of air pollutants
in combustion processes. Control technology
and costs. Regulation of air quality and emis-
sions.

G. J. McRae

10.572 Principles of Combustion

Prereq.: 5.62, 10.302, or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic concepts and applications of combus-

tion. Gas-phase reaction mechanisms and
thermochemical kinetics: reaction property es-
timation; treatment of pressure and tempera-
ture dependence; elementary and global
reaction modeling of multiple reaction systems.
Theory of ignition, flame propagation, ex-
plosion, and detonation. Characteristics of
premixed, diffusion, laminar, and turbulent
flames. Combustion of liquids and solids;
pyrolysis and volatilization; gas reactions with
solid carbon. Formation mechanisms of pol-
lutants and valuable materials in flames.

J. B. Howard

10.580 Solid-State Surface Science

Prereq.: 10.213

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Structural, chemical, and electronic properties

of solids and solid surfaces. Analytical tools
used to characterize surfaces including Auger
and photoelectron spectroscopies and electron
diffraction techniques. Surface ther-
modynamics and kinetics including adsorption-
desorption, catalytic properties, and sputtering
processes. Applications to microelectronics,
optical materials, and catalysis.

K. K. Gleason, H. H. Sawin

10.581J Materials Processing

(Same subject as 3.52J)

Prereq.: 3.01, 3.185, or equivalents
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 3.52J.
A. Mortensen, K. F. Jensen, M. C. Flemings

10.582J Plasma Processing in Integrated
Circuit Fabrication

(Same subject as 6.776J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.776J.
H. H. Sawin, L. R. Reif

390 Chapter Vili

10.610 Applied Quantum Mechanics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application of quantum mechanics to chemical

systems and materials. Quantum mechanical
methods of predicting chemical structure,
spectroscopic properties, chemical reactivity,
and properties of materials. Hartree-Fock
theory, density functional theory, modern com-
putational techniques, methods of approximat-
ing correlation energy.

Staff

10.631 Structural Theories of Polymer Fluid
Mechanics

Prereq.: 10.301

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Structural and molecular models for polymeric

liquids. Nonequilibrium properties are em-
phasized. Elementary kinetic theory of polymer
solutions. General phase space kinetic for
polymer melts and solutions. Network theories.
Interrelations between structure and rheologi-
cal properties.

R. C. Armstrong

10.633 Physicochemical
Hydrodynamics

Prereq.: 10.50, 2.25

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of physical-chemical interac-

tions with fluid flow including aspects of
biomolecular hydrodynamics. Transport of
mass, heat, and charge in laminar flow. Par-
ticle-liquid flows with and without charge ef-
fects. Macromolecules as hydrodynamic
particles with application to separation proces-
ses. Surface tension, phase change, and
chemical reactions in flows. Rheology and con-
centrated suspensions.

H. Brenner, R. F. Probstein

10.65 Chemical Reactor Engineering

Prereq.: 10.37
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Applies chemical kinetics to development and

improvement of industrial processes. Nonideal
reactor analysis, including residence-time dis-
tributions, concepts of mixedness, and
segregation, dispersion, and CSTR models.
Mass and energy transfer limitations in
heterogeneous noncatalytic and catalytic reac-
tion systems. Reactor stability and sensitivity
to operating parameters. Choice and design of
reactors for heterogeneous reactions.

K. K. Gleason, K. F. Jensen

10.652 Principles and Applications of
Chemical Kinetics

Prereq.: 10.65 or 10.37, 5.62

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Estimation of thermodynamic and kinetic
properties based on molecular dynamics.
Methods including collisional theory and transi-
tion state theory will be developed for the es-
timation of unimolecular, bimolecular,
termolecular, and complex reaction systems.
Pressure effects and fall-off treatment using
Lindemann-Hinshelwood, Kassel, RRK, and
RRKM treatments. Chemical activation and
ion-molecule reactions. Content may vary
drawing on applications in combustion, plasma
chemistry, and heterogeneous reactions.

J. B. Howard, H. H. Sawin

10.668J Statistical Mechanics of Polymers

(Same subject as 3.941J)

Prereq.: 10.568 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concepts of statistical mechanics and ther-
modynamics applied to macromolecules:
polymer conformations in melts, solutions, and
gels; Rotational lsomeric State theory, Markov
processes and molecular simulation methods
applied to polymers; incompatibility and
segregation in incompressible and compres-
sible systems; molecular theory of viscoelas-
ticity; relation to scattering and experimental
measurements.

G. Rutledge, A. Mayes

10.74J Radiative Transfer

(Same subject as 2.58J)
Prereq.: 10.302 or 2.51

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.58J.
A. F. Sarofim, L. R. Glicksman

10.792J Proseminar in Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.792J, 2.890J, 3.80J,
16.985J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.792J.
D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll

10.801 Entrepreneurship

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in

SWE section on page 562.
T. G. Gutowski


--- 03.pdf Page 28 ---
School of Engineering

10.805J Technology, Law, and the Working
Environment

(Same subject as 15.656J, TPP.35J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Addresses relationship between technology-re-
lated problems and the law applicable to work
environment. National Labor Relations Act, Oc-
cupational Safety and Health Act. Toxic Sub-
stances Control Act, state worker's
compensation, and suits by workers in the
courts discussed. Problems related to occupa-
tional health and safety, collective bargaining
as a mechanism for altering technology in the
workplace, job alienation, productivity, and the
organization of work addressed. Prior courses
or experience in the environmental, public
health, or law-related areas.

N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart

10.806 Management in Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

J.-H. Chun

10.816 Engineering Risk-Benefit
Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 999.

G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni

School of Chemical
Engineering Practice

10.80 (10.82) School of Chemical
Engineering Practice — Technical
Accomplishment — West Point Station

Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.81 (10.83)
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Conducted at the Merck & Company Inc.
facility in West Point, Pennsylvania. Group
problem assignments include process develop-
ment design, simulation and control, technical
service, and new-product development. Grad-
ing based on technical accomplishment. Credit
granted in lieu of master’s thesis; see
departmental description on School of Chemi-
cal Engineering Practice in Chapter 7 for
details. Enrollment limited and subject to plant
availability.

T. A. Hatton

10.81 (10.83) School of Chemical
Engineering Practice — Communication
Skills and Human Relations — West Point
Station

Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.80 (10.82)

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Conducted at the Merck & Company Inc.

facility in West Point, Pennsylvania. Group
problem assignments include process develop-
ment, design, simulation and control, technical
service, and new-product development. Grad-
ing based on communication skills and human
relations in group assignments. Credit granted
in lieu of master’s thesis; see departmental
description on School of Chemical Engineering
Practice in Chapter 7 for details. Enrollment
limited and subject to plant availability.

T. A. Hatton

10.84 (10.86) School of Chemical
Engineering Practice — Technical
Accomplishment — Midland Station

Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.85 (10.87)

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Conducted at the research laboratories and

manufacturing facilities of the Dow Chemical
Company in Midland, Michigan. Group prob-
lem assignments include process develop-
ment, design, simulation and control, technical
service, and new-product development. Grad-
ing based on technical accomplishment. Credit
granted in lieu of master’s thesis; see
departmental description on School of Chemi-
cal Engineering Practice in Chapter 7 for
details. Enrollment limited and subject to plant
availability.

T. A. Hatton

10.85 (10.87) School of Chemical
Engineering Practice — Communication
Skills and Human Relations — Midland
Station

Prereq.: Permission of instructor, 10.84 (10.86)

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Conducted at the research laboratories and

manufacturing facilities of the Dow Chemical
Company in Midland, Michigan. Group prob-
lem assignments include process development
design, simulation and control, technical ser-
vice, and new-product development. Credit
granted in lieu of master’s thesis; see
departmental description on School of Chemi-
cal Engineering Practice in Chapter 7 for
details. Enrollment limited and subject to plant
availability.

T. A. Hatton

General

10.90 Independent Research Problem

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For special and graduate students who wish to
carry out some minor investigation in a par-
ticular field. Subject and hours to fit individual
requirements.

R. E. Cohen

10.910 Independent Research Problem

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

10.911 Independent Research Problem

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates who wish to do a special
investigation or special topic in a particular
field. Topic and hours arranged.

C. M. Mohr

10.920 Indepartmental Seminar in
Nanostructured Materials

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Research seminars on the synthesis, structural
characterization, and application of nanostruc-
tured materials. Presentations by faculty and
students from Departments of Chemical En-
gineering, Chemistry, Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science, and Materials Science
and Engineering engaging in studies of
nanocrystallites, clusters, thin films, and quan-
tum dots. Open to students interested in an in-
terdisciplinary approach to ultrafine materials
processing.

J. Y. Ying

10.94 Special Problems in Chemical
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Problem of current interest, varying from year
to year.
C. L. Cooney

10.940J Seminar on Pharmaceutical and
Biotechnology Industry Management

(Same subject as 15.138J, 7.89J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.138J.
T. J. Allen, C. L. Cooney, S. N. Finkelstein,
A. Sinskey

391 Chapter VIII


--- 03.pdf Page 29 ---
School of Engineering

SATS

10.95 Special Problems in Chemical
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Directed research and study of special chemi-

cal engineering problems.
R. E. Cohen

10.960J Student Seminar in Polymer
Science and Technology

(Same subject as 3.903J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

A series of seminars covering a broad
spectrum of topics in polymer science and en-
gineering, featuring both on- and off-campus
speakers.

R. E. Cohen, P. T. Hammond, E. W. Merrill,
G. C. Rutledge, E. L. Thomas

10.961 Seminar in Advanced Air Pollution
Research

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Research seminars, presented by students

engaged in thesis work in the field of air pollu-

tion. Particular emphasis given to atmospheric

chemistry, mathematical modeling, and policy
is

analysis.
G. J. McRae

10.962 Seminar in Molecular Cell
Engineering
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Weekly seminar with discussion of ongoing re-

search and relevant literature by graduate stu-
dents, postdoctoral fellows, and visiting
scientists on issues at the interface of chemi-
cal engineering with molecular cell biology. Em-
phasis is on quantitative aspects of
physicochemical mechanisms involved in
receptor/igand interactions, receptor signal
transduction processes, receptor-mediated cell
behavioral responses, and applications of
these in biotechnology and medicine.

D. A. Lauffenburger

10.971 Seminar in Fluid Mechanics and
Transport Phenomena

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar series on current research on New-
tonian and non-Newtonian fluid mechanics
and transport phenomena, and applications to
materials processing. Seminars given by guest
speakers and research students.

R. A. Brown, R. C. Armstrong

10.972 Biochemical Engineering Research
Seminar

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar allows students to present their re-

search programs to other students and staff.
The research topics include fermentation and
enzyme technology, mammalian and animal
cell cultivation, and biological product separa-
tion.

D. |. C. Wang, C. L. Cooney.

10.973 Bioengineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar covering topics related to current re-

search in the application of chemical engineer-
ing principles to biomedical science and
biotechnology.

C. K. Colton, W. M. Deen

10.974 Catalysis and Reaction Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on research topics and recent
developments in heterogeneous catalysis,
reaction engineering, and related topics. In-
tended primarily for students engaged in re-
search in these areas, but open to students
with background and interest in related areas
such as surface sciences and noncatalytic
reactions.

M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos

10.975 Seminar in Polymer Science and
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Research seminars, presented by students

engaged in thesis work in the field of polymers
and by visiting lecturers from industry and
academia.

R. E. Cohen, P. T. Hammond, E. W. Merrill,
G. C. Rutledge

10.976 Process Design, Operations, and
Control

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminars on the state of the art in design,

operations, and control of processing systems,
with emphasis on computer-based tools. Dis-
cussions guided by the research interests of
participating students. Topics include mathe-
matical and numerical techniques, repre-
sentational methodologies, and software
development.

P. |. Barton

10.977 Process Systems Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminars on the state of the art in process sys-
tems engineering including: process develop-
ment and design; product design; process
operations monitoring, analysis, and control;
process simulation, planning, and scheduling;
environmental considerations; computer-aided
tools for analysis, design, optimization. Semi-
nars presented by doctoral students and visit-
ing scientists/engineers.

Geo. Stephanopoulos, G. J. McRae,

P. |. Barton

10.978 Seminar in Applied
Thermodynamics, Kinetics, and Transport

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Review of current topics in phase equilibria,
mass transport, and chemical kinetics. Sub-
jects include oxidation and hydrolysis reac-
tions, and solid-salt nucleation and solubility in
supercritical water; dissolution, corrosion,
electrochemistry, and equations of state in
high-temperature, high-pressure aqueous sys-
tems; fundamental processes in the thermal
spallation of rock.

J. W. Tester, J. B. Howard, K. A. Smith

10.979 Plasma Processing

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced topics in plasma processing used in
the fabrication of microelectronics. Emphasis
placed on topics of plasma kinetics, gas-solid
interactions, sputtering, and reactor design.
Discussions include current research in the
literature.

H. H. Sawin

10.980 Macrotransport Processes

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar covering current research topics on
theoretical aspects of transport processes, con-
tinuum mechanics, and statistical mechanics.
Seminars given by graduate and postdoctoral
students, participating faculty, and guest
speakers.

H. Brenner

392 Chapter Vil


--- 03.pdf Page 30 ---
Department of Chemical Engineering Course 10

10.981 Seminar in Colloid and
Interface Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Review of current topics in colloid and inter-
face science. Topics include statistical
mechanics and thermodynamics of micellar
solutions, self-assembling systems, and
microemulsions; solubilization of simple ions,
amino acids, and proteins in reversed micelles;
enzymatic reactions in reversed micelles;
phase equilibria in colloidal systems; interfacial
phenomena in colloidal systems; biomedical
aspects of colloidal systems.

D. Blankschtein, T. A. Hatton, P. E. Laibinis

10.982 Special Topics in Experimental
Colloid and Surface Science
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

In-depth discussion of fundamental physical
relationships underlying techniques commonly
used in the study of colloids and surfaces with
a focus on recent advances and experimental
applications. Topics have included the applica-
tion of steady-state and time-resolved fluores-
cence spectroscopies, infrared spectroscopy,
and scanning probe microscopies.

T. A. Hatton, P. E. Laibinis

10.983 Reactive Processing of Materials

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced topics in synthesis of materials
through processes involving transport
phenomena and chemical reactions. Chemical
vapor deposition, plasma processing, and
chemical vapor infiltration, modeling and ex-
perimental approaches to kinetics of gas
phase and surface reactions, transport
phenomena in complex systems, materials syn-
thesis, and materials characterization. Semi-
nars by graduate students, postdoctoral
associates, participating faculty, and visiting
lecturers.

K. F. Jensen

10.984 Biomedical Applications of
Chemical Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Weekly seminar with lectures on current re-
search by graduate students, postdoctoral fel-
lows, and visiting scientists on topics related to
biomedical applications of chemical engineer-
ing. Specific topics include polymeric control-
led release technology, extracorporal reactor °
design, biomedical polymers, bioengineering
aspects of pharmaceuticals, and
biomaterials/tissue and cell interactions.

R. S. Langer, L. G. Cima

10.985 Seminar in Combustion Chemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Readings, presentations, and discussions of

selected, currently active research topics in
combustion chemistry. Examples include
chemistry and structure of flames, ther-
mochemical kinetics methods and calculations,
mathematical modeling and computer analysis
of reaction networks, experimental methods, in-
teractions of chemistry with transport and fluid
m ,

J. B. Howard

10.986 Gas-Solid Reactions

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Review of current literature and research on

gas-solid reactions, with particular emphasis
on combustion, gasification, and gas absorp-
tion at high temperatures. Includes the
mechanisms and kinetics of gas-solid reac-
tions, the characterization of the structure and
modeling of diffusion in porous solids, aerosol
formation, and growth.

M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, A. F. Sarofim

10.987 Solid Thin Films and Interfaces

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Current research topics and fundamental is-

sues relating the structure and properties of
solid thin films and interfaces to processing his-
tory. Emphasis on applying analytical techni-
ques, such as solid-state NMR, to explore the
thermodynamics and kinetics of growth, defect
formation, and structural modification incurred
during microelectronics fabrication.

K. K. Gleason

10.988 Synthesis and Surface Chemistry of
Materials

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Lectures, readings, and discussions of novel

synthesis of advanced ceramic, catalytic,
electronic, and optical materials by physical
and chemical routes. Examines surface-struc-
ture-property relationships of ultrafine
materials. Utilizes process variables and spe-
cialized surface characterization techniques to
approach structure tailoring of materials. Open
to undergraduate students and UROP stu-
dents interested in these selected research
topics.

J. Y. Ying

10.989 Special Topics in Biotechnology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Research seminars, presented by graduate
students and visitors from industry and
academia, covering a broad range of topics of
current interest in biotechnology. Discussion
focuses on generic questions with potential
biotechnological applications and the quest for
solutions through a coordinated interdiscipli-
nary approach.

Gr. Stephanopoulos

10.990 Introduction to Chemical
Engineering Research

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-3 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Introduction to research in chemical engineer-
ing by faculty of chemical engineering depart-
ment. Focus is on recent developments and
research projects available to new graduate
students.

R. A. Brown

10.991 Seminar in Chemical
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

10.992 Seminar in Chemical
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For students working on doctoral theses.
R. A. Brown

10.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Chem.E., Ph.D., or Sc.D.
thesis; to be arranged by the student and ap-
propriate MIT faculty member.

R. E. Cohen

Descriptions of Subjects 393


--- 03.pdf Page 31 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

Course 11

Undergraduate Subjects

Introductory Subjects

11.001J Introduction to Urban Design and
Development

(Same subject as 4.250J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Examines both the structure of the cities and

ways that they can be changed. Includes his-
torical forces that have produced cities,
models of urban analysis, contemporary
theory of urban design, and implementation
strategies. A series of core lectures focuses on
student work. Speakers present cases, involv-
ing current projects, which illustrate the scope
and methods of urban design practice.

L. Vale

11.002 Introduction to Public Policy
Analysis and Government Action

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-1-8 HASS

Presents major analytic techniques of public

policy analysis: deterministic and probabilistic
models, cost-benefit analysis, decision
analysis, linear programming. Class sessions
organized in order of main tasks of policy
analyst: identifying alternatives, implementa-
tion, evaluation. Compares alternative ap-
proaches to public policy analysis.

Consult Department Headquarters.

11.007J Controversies in Public Policy

(Same subject as 17.201J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Introduction to political aspects of public policy.

Considers philosophical rationales for govern-
ment action and the evolution of public policy
in America; the policy-making process; basic
strategies of public policy, including markets,
government regulation, mass persuasion; and
ways of analyzing the impacts of public
policies — social indicators, cost/benefit
analysis, evaluation of distributive equity, and
unintended consequences.

L. E. Susskind

Urban Studies and
Planning
For degree requirements, see listing in

Chapter VII under the School of
Architecture and Planning.

11.011 The Art and Science of Negotiation

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Drawing on lessons of game theory and
decision analysis, this subject presents a
strategic view of negotiation. The paradoxical
nature of bargaining power, coalition behavior,
and asymmetries of communication are closely
examined. The value (and limits) of this dis-
cipline are examined and critiqued in a variety
of real-world applications, including internation-
al conflict, environmental disputes, and plea-
bargaining. All students participate in a series
of simulations designed to sharpen their
analytic and creative skills.

Consult Department Headquarters.

11.013J American Urban History |

(Same subject as 21H.231J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-6 HASS

Seminar on the history of institutions and in-

Stitutional change in urban America from
roughly 1890 to the present. Among the institu-
tions considered are political machines, police
departments, schools, courts, hospitals,
prisons, welfare departments, and universities.
Focuses on readings and discussions.

R. M. Fogelson

11.014J American Urban History Il

(Same subject as 21H.232J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-6 HASS

Seminar on the history of selected features of

the physical environment of urban America.
Among the features considered are parks,
cemeteries, tenements, suburbs, zoos,
skyscrapers, department stores, super-
markets, and amusement parks. Focuses on
readings and discussions.

R. M. Fogelson

11.015J Riots, Strikes, and Conspiracies in
American History

(Same subject as 21H.104J)

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5

See description under subject 21H.104J.
R. M. Fogelson

11.018 Solving the Infrastructure Crisis

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Examines the influence of infrastructure plan-
ning and development on cities and regions.
Identifies the political, physical, and economic
forces that influence the construction (and
maintenance) of roads, bridges, water and
sewer lines, etc. Considers different strategies
for repairing crumbling infrastructure, including
privatization.

P. Levy

11.020 Poverty, Public Policy, and
Controversy
(Revised Content and Units)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Introductory subject to the study of poverty in
the United States, viewed from an international
perspective. Much social controversy in the
1990s has been concerned with how society
should respond to poverty, and the related is-
sues of welfare, out-of-wedlock births, home-
lessness, crime, and drugs. Subject
investigates how particular societal findings
are brought to controversies. Examines both
knowledge about poverty and related be-
haviors from social science research and how
this knowledge is incorporated into public dis-
course. Experience of other countries is intro-
duced to make explicit the assumptions on
which American approaches to poverty are
based.

M. Rein

11.022J American Living Standards and
Income Inequality

(Subject meets with 11.450, 14.65J)

Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Provides students with an integrated overview
of the contemporary US economy, including
trends in living standards and income ine-
quality, productivity within the manufacturing
and service sectors, savings and investment,
the federal budget deficit, and the changing na-
ture of the poverty population. Applies recent
economic research and economic data sour-
ces to the study of current economic problems.
Meets with graduate subject 11.450, but as-
signments differ.

F. S. Levy

394 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 32 ---
Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11

11.023 Bridging Cultural and Racial
Differences

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
4-0-5

Explores cultural and racial stereotypes to in-
crease understanding and appreciation of dif-
ferences. Emphasis on developing techniques
for conflict resolution in a more diversified
America in the next century. Attention to
economic status, residential segregation,
education, political participation, and crime
through current readings, films/videos, and
guest speakers.

C. G. Williams

11.024 Great Cities

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-6

Seminar that explores the attributes of cities
that are described by a variety of sources, in-
cluding members of the class, as “great cities.”
Class concerns a variety of criteria that have
been, or might be, used to ascribe greatness
to cities, such as attractiveness, quality of life,
and richness of opportunity, and exmaines the
consistency and/or contradictory evidence in
judgments about cities.

J. P. de Monchaux

11.026) Downtown
(New)

(Subject meets with 21H.234J, 11.339)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

2-0-7 HASS

Seminar on downtown in US cities from the
late nineteenth century to the late twentieth.
Emphasis on downtown as an idea, place, and
cluster of interests, on the changing character
of downtown, and on recent efforts to rebuild
it. Subjects considered include subways,
skyscrapers, highways, urban renewal, and
retail centers. Focus on readings, discussions,
and individual research projects. Meets with
egy subject 11.339, but assignments dif-
er.

R. M. Fogelson, B. J. Frieden

Specialized Subjects

11.102J Theories of Economic Development

(Same subject as 14.75J)
Prereq.: 14.01, 14.02

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 14.75J.
A. Banerjee

11.104 Infrastructure in Developing
Countries

(Subject meets with 11.469J, 1.254J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9

Meets with graduate subject 11.469J, but as-

signments differ. See description under subject
11.469J.
R. A. Gakenheimer

11.122 Environmental Policy and Regulation

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Evaluates the strengths and weaknesses of dif-

ferent ways in which the government can act
to protect the environment: pollution stand-
ards, marketable rights, taxes, and citizen em-
powerment. Emphasis on economic analysis,
but also compares other policy perspectives in-
cluding law and politics.

Consult Department Headquarters.

11.123 Big Plans

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
2-0-7 HASS

Explores social, technological, political,
economic, and cultural implications of “Big
Plans” — those that are vast in scale (whether
financially, geographically, or across functional
areas). Examples include the Boston Harbor
Cleanup, Washington as a national capital,
and housing plans in developing countries.

J. P. de Monchaux

11.124 Introduction to Teaching and
Learning

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-6-3 HASS

Emphasis on teaching and learning in urban

settings. Concentrates on understanding the
child as knowledge constructor and on dif-
ferent approaches to curriculum design and as-
sessment. Students work through constructive
learning projects, analyze videotapes of pre-
college students engaged in similar projects,
and compare their own theories and problem-
solving strategies with those of younger stu-
dents. Participants analyze videotapes of
master math/science teachers working in the
classroom with students. Each student is
paired with an experienced middle- or high-
school teacher/mentor who attends the sub-
ject. Recommended for students considering
careers in teaching.

J. Bamberger, S. Carey

11.125 Observation and Analysis of
Classroom Settings

Prereq.: 11.124 or permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-6-3 HASS

Five hours of observation in math and science
classrooms grades 6—12. Includes interpreta-
tion development, observation skills, log-keep-
ing, analysis and critiques of student
observations. High school teachers consult on
classroom management, discipline, learning
styles, administration, diverse communities.
Subject instructors, MIT Teaching Fellows, and
high school teachers meet with students to criti-
que logs and help design curriculum units for
classroom testing. Satisfies 75 hours of super-
vised classroom observation required for
Mass. teacher's certification.

J. Bamberger, S. Carey

11.165 Courts and American Society

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Analyzes the historical evolution of the courts
in American society. Topics covered include
the debate over judicial activism, the role of
the courts as agents of social change, and the
American proclivity for litigation to resolve both
public and private disputes. Controversies ex-
amined include the abortion decisions, the
school desegregation cases, and the evolution
of the insanity defense.

Consult Department Headquarters.

Laboratories

11.188 Urban Planning and Social Science
Laboratory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-6-3 Institute LAB

Introduces social science research methods
and empirical analysis experience in a
“workshop” setting involving urban planning
problems. Explores various qualitative and
quantitative methods — surveys, case studies,
comparative research, statistical and spatial
analysis. Emphasizes development of a re-
search project related to a real-world planning
problem, selection of appropriate methods,
use of primary and secondary data, and com-
puter-based modeling and spatial analysis. In-
cludes experience in interviewing and
conducting research work in the field.

J. Ferreira, Jr., Q. Shen

Descriptions of Subjects 395


--- 03.pdf Page 33 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

Tutorials, Fieldwork,
and Internships

11.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

11.URG Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in
Urban Studies and Planning. For further infor-

mation, consult the Departmental Coordinators.

J. Ferreira, Jr.

11.191, 11.192 Supervised Readings in
Urban Studies

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6

Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in

urban studies. By arrangement with individual
members of the staff.
J. P. de Monchaux

11.194, 11.195 Special Topics in Urban
Studies and
Planning

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Small-group study of special topics under staff

supervision. For undergraduates wishing to
pursue further study or fieldwork in specialized
areas of urban studies or city and regional
planning not covered in regular subjects of in-
struction.

J. P. de Monchaux

11.196 Urban Fieldwork and Internships

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Practical application of city and regional plan-

ning techniques to towns, cities, and regions,
including problems of replanning, redevelop-
ment, and renewal of existing communities. In-
cludes internships, under staff supervision, in
municipal and state agencies and departments
under staff supervision.

J. P. de Monchaux

11.197, 11.198, 11.199 Special Studies in
Urban Studies and Planning

Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Planned subjects of instruction for use during

IAP only. 11.197 is taught P/D/F.
J. P. de Monchaux .

Graduate Subjects

Master’s Core Subjects

11.200 Planning and Institutional Processes
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Basic paradigms and theories of planning prac-

tice. Evaluates historical and current develop-
ments in planning, with special emphasis on
the institutional setting of planning in American
society. Lectures, case studies, and compara-
tive analyses explore the changing roles of the
planner and the key dilemmas in planning prac-
tice. Focuses on strategies of institutional inter-
vention and implementation. Restricted to
first-year M.C.P. students.

G. Hack, L. E. Susskind

11.205 Planning and Institutional
Processes in Developing Countries
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

The planning process in developing countries.

Interaction between planners and institutions
at both national and local levels. Overview of
theories of state, organizational arrangements,
implementation mechanisms, and planning
styles. Case studies of planning: decentraliza-
tion, provision of low-cost housing, and new-
town development. Analyzes various roles
planners play in different institutional contexts.
Professional ethics and values amidst conflict-
ing demands. Restricted to first-year M.C.P.
and SPURS students.

B. Sanyal

11.207 Introduction to Computers in Public
Management!

(11.227)
Prereq.: 11.220
G (Fall)

1-1-1

11.208 Introduction to Computers in Public
Management Il

(11.228)
Prereq.: 11.227
G (IAP)

1-1-1

Basic understanding of microcomputer uses in
planning and public management. Develop
problem-solving skills using computer-based
tools for “what-if analyses. Emphasis on con-
structing, running, and interpreting various
analytic models and spatial analyses using
spreadsheets, database management, and
mapping. Introductions to geographic informa-
tion systems and structured programming.

J. Ferreira, Jr., Q. Shen

11.210 Political Economy for Planners |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
4-2-6

Introduces economic analysis for planners em-
phasizing problems which are encountered in
professional education. Topics include basic
elements of economic theory, multiple perspec-
tives on the labor market, environmental is-
sues, productivity growth and restructuring,
income inequality, health care, and the new
location theory. Restricted to first-year M.C.P.
students.

F. Levy

11.220 Quantitative Reasoning and
Statistical Methods for Planning |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
4-2-6

Develops logical, empirically based arguments
using statistical techniques and analytic
methods. Covers elementary statistics, prob-
ability, and other types of quantitative reason-
ing useful for description; estimation,
comparison, and explanation. Emphasizes the
use and limitations of analytical techniques in
planning practice. Restricted to first-year
M.C.P. students.

J. M. Schuster

Department-wide Subjects

Methods

11.221 Quantitative Reasoning and
Statistical Methods for Planning I

Prereq.: 11.220

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4-2-6

Using the analytical skills developed in 11.220,
this subject extends the statistical techniques
to address topics in modeling and forecasting.
Emphasizes the use and limitation of modeling
in planning practice. Covers techniques of mul-
tiple regression and time series analysis. Uses
data sets from actual planning applications for
examples and problem sets.

Q. Shen

396 Chapter Vill


--- 03.pdf Page 34 ---
Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11

11.223 Introduction to Modes of
Argumentation and Writing for Professional
Planning

(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-0-7

Introductory subject in preparation for writing
the thesis or dissertation, required of first-year
students who are not exempted on the basis of
their performance in the department's writing
assessment, and open to others as an elec-
tive. Reviews the essential principles of exposi-
tion in English, focusing on the research essay
as the primary vehicle for developing policy
and ideas. Students encouraged to
focus on consideration of purpose and
audience; exploring topics; planning and draft-
ing; revising and editing; and constructing and
analyzing arguments. Problems encountered
particularly by multilingual students also ad-
dressed as needed.
J. Morrison

11.225 Modes of Argumentation and
Writing for Advanced Students
(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6

Advanced subject in the principles and prac-
tices of analyzing, devising, and framing argu-
ments in the context of writing about public
issues and policies, open to advanced M.C.P.
and Ph.D. students. Argumentation ap-
proached from rhetorical, social, dialectical,
and heuristic points of view. Students develop
a research-based term paper, which for
M.C.P. students can be part of their thesis,
and for Ph.D. candidates either their first-year
paper or a portion of their dissertation.

J. Morrison

11.232 The Uses of Social Science for
Social Change
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-0-7

Examines the ways that research has been
used and can be used to promote and support
change in policy and practice. The social scien-
ces provide theory, ideas, and empirical
evidence to justify new policy initiatives and
revise old ones.

M. Rein

11.233 Introduction to Research Design
and Methodology

(New)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-9

For graduate students planning independent

research projects. Offers an overview of the
most common of research design and
analytical strategies employed in the social
sciences, including survey research, ethnog-
raphy, and comparative historical methods.
Particular attention to the strengths and limita-
tions of qualitative and quantitative ap-
proaches, and to ensuring that research
questions drive the methodology and not the
other way around. The main class requirement
is a research proposal. Students select a topic,
review the relevant literature, and identify and
justify the kinds of resources and methods ap-
propriate to their respective studies.

A. Cintrén

11.234 Making Sense: Qualitative Methods
in Environmental Design

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-4-6

Surveys uses of qualitative methods in environ-

mental design practice and research. Topics in-
clude: observing environments and physical
traces, observing environmental behavior,
asking questions, focused interviews, stand-
ardized questionnaires, use of written archival
materials, use of visual materials including
photographs and maps, case studies, and
comparative methods. Emphasizes use of
each of these skills to collect and make sense
of qualitative data.

L. Vale

11.235 Analyzing Projects and
Organizations
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 11.205
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar builds analytic skills for evaluating

programs and projects, the organizations that
carry them out, and their environment covers
1) using proxy indicators where data are poor
and time is short; 2) preparing for, conducting,
and interpreting interviews; 3) conducting
cross-project and cross-organization com-
parisons; and 4) seeing the rationality in seem-
ingly chaotic organizational and project
environments. Desirable for students prepar-
ing for Master's or Ph.D. theses.

J. Tendler

11.237 Gender, Work, and Public Policy
(New)

(Subject meets with SP.470)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9

Women workers rarely appear in labor market
theory. When they do, they are represented as
a separate category, determined by biological
differences and their family responsibilities.
Subject examines the status of working
women under a variety of governmental
policies and labor conditions. First part is a sur-
vey of key debates on sex and gender differen-
ces in employment and wages. Using the
changing structure of the US labor force as an
example, second part examines attempted
policy responses to the increasing feminization
of the labor force. Students apply theoretical is-
sues to a policy topic of their choice (e.g.,
familiy leave, unionization, tax credit, or in-
come support, etc.).

A. Cintrén

11.251 The Policy-Making Process

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-7

Focuses on the process by which public policy
is made. Organized as a cooperative venture
by students and intended to build on their inter-
est in and knowledge of different policy
arenas. The readings include case studies of
policy making and attempts by authors to
describe the process by which public policy is
made. The intent is to help students develop
their own perspective on this process.

M. Rein

11.254 Public Sector Economics for
Planners

Prereq.: 11.210

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9

Develops basic concepts of public finance
theory, including public goods, externalities,
tax incidence, and distributional equity, as they
apply to decentralized government institutions
in today's changing fiscal environment. Focus
is on revenue generation, service provision,
and intergovernmental fiscal relations. Options
for improving state and local government per-
formance through tax reform, increased cost
recovery, and alternative service delivery arran-
gements, such as private sector involvement in
traditional “public” sector functions, are con-
sidered.

P. Smoke

Descriptions of Subjects 397


--- 03.pdf Page 35 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

11.255 Bargaining, Negotiation, and Dispute
Resolution in the Public Sector

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
4-0-8

Investigates social conflict and distributional
disputes in the public sector. While theoretical
aspects of conflict are considered, focus is on
the practice of dispute resolution. Com-
parisons between unassisted and assisted
negotiation are reviewed along with the techni-
ques of facilitation, negotiation, and nonbind-
ing arbitration. <

L. E. Susskind

11.256 Comparative Studies of Negotiation
and Dispute Resolution

Prereq.: 11.255 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced research seminar open only to
qualified graduate students. Focus on cross-
cultural and cross-group analysis of institution-
al barriers to effective dispute resolution.
Students are expected to prepare detailed
comparative case studies.

L. E. Susskind

11.257 Research Seminar on Theory-
Building in Negotiation and Dispute
Resolution

Prereq.: 11.255 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced research seminar open only to
qualified graduate students. Focus is on cross-
disciplinary contributions to the theory of
negotiation and dispute resolution. Students
are expected to prepare in-depth theory-build-
ing case studies.

L. E. Susskind

11.258J Organizations and Environments

(11.512)

(Same subject as 15.342J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.342J.
M. A. Scully

Program Group Subjects

Urban Design and Development

11.301J Urban Design and Development

(Same subject as 4.252J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9

Examines both the structure of cities and ways

they can be changed. Includes historical forces
that have produced cities, models of urban
analysis, contemporary theories of urban
design, implementation strategies. Core lec-
tures supplemented by discussion group focus-
ing on student work. Speakers present cases
involving current projects illustrating the scope
and methods of urban design practice.

D. Frenchman

11.302J Urban Design Politics

(Same subject as 4.253J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines ways urban design contributes to

distribution of political power and resources in
cities, Investigates the nature of relations be-
tween built form and political purposes through
close study of a wide variety of situations
where public sector design commissions and
planning processes have been clearly
motivated by political pressures. Lectures and
discussions focus on specific case studies of
twentieth-century government-sponsored
designs carried out under diverse regimes in
the United States, Europe, and elsewhere.

L. Vale

11.303J Design for Urban Development

(Same subject as 4.254)
Prereq.: 11.447

G (Spring)

2-4-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on development programming and

design and the integration of marketing and
finance with physical planning. Two studio
projects interspersed with lectures, field trips,
and short sketch problems. Offers students a
perspective on the role of the architectural
designer in the development process.

D. Frenchman, P. Roth

11.304J Site and Urban Systems Planning
(Revised Units)

(Same subject as 4.255J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-2-8

The planning of sites and the infrastructure sys-

tems which serve them. Site analysis, spatial
organization of uses on sites, design of road-
ways and subdivision patterns, grading plans,
utility systems, analysis of runoff, parking re-
quirements, traffic and off-site impacts,
landscaping. Lectures on analytical techniques
and examples of good site-planning practice.
Assignments on each aspect of subject.

G. Hack, K. Hill

11.305 Landscape Ecology and Urban
Development

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9 [P/D/F]

Presents a framework for current landscape
ecological theory, structured to encourage ap-
plication in physical planning of landscapes.
Case studies link theory to practice, and in-
clude both urban and rural landscapes.
Science and planning are examined as social
practices which rely on situated knowledge.
Past and present methods of ecological plan-
ning are reviewed and critiqued in a student
project. Major topics include biodiversity, cycli-
cal processes, assessment of landscape struc-
tures, and design for sustainability.

K. Hill

11.306 Impact Assessment Techniques

(11.224)

Prereq.: 11.220

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Methods for predicting and evaluating impact
of development, stressing predictive techni-
ques for use by public officials without formal
training in quantitative methods. Uses both
computer-based modeling and non-quantita-
tive techniques as aids in evaluation of alterna-
tives. Includes traffic, fiscal, employment, and
visual impacts.

Consult Department Headquarters.

11.329J User Needs Programming

(Same subject as 4.266J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.266J.
S. C. Howell

11.330J Theory of City Form

(Same subject as 4.241J)

Prereq.: 11.001J or 4.252J or 11.301J
G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.241J.
J. Beinart

11.331J Advanced Seminar in City Form

(Same subject as 4.242J)

Prereq.: 4.241J, 11.330J

G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.242J.
J. Beinart

11.332J Urban Design

(Same subject as 4.163J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 4.163J.
J. P. de Monchaux, M. Dennis

398 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 1 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

11.255 Bargaining, Negotiation, and Dispute
Resolution in the Public Sector

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
4-0-8

Investigates social conflict and distributional
disputes in the public sector. While theoretical
aspects of conflict are considered, focus is on
the practice of dispute resolution. Com-
parisons between unassisted and assisted
negotiation are reviewed along with the techni-
ques of facilitation, negotiation, and nonbind-
ing arbitration. <

L. E. Susskind

11.256 Comparative Studies of Negotiation
and Dispute Resolution

Prereq.: 11.255 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced research seminar open only to
qualified graduate students. Focus on cross-
cultural and cross-group analysis of institution-
al barriers to effective dispute resolution.
Students are expected to prepare detailed
comparative case studies.

L. E. Susskind

11.257 Research Seminar on Theory-
Building in Negotiation and Dispute
Resolution

Prereq.: 11.255 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced research seminar open only to
qualified graduate students. Focus is on cross-
disciplinary contributions to the theory of
negotiation and dispute resolution. Students
are expected to prepare in-depth theory-build-
ing case studies.

L. E. Susskind

11.258J Organizations and Environments

(11.512)

(Same subject as 15.342J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.342J.
M. A. Scully

Program Group Subjects

Urban Design and Development

11.301J Urban Design and Development

(Same subject as 4.252J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9

Examines both the structure of cities and ways

they can be changed. Includes historical forces
that have produced cities, models of urban
analysis, contemporary theories of urban
design, implementation strategies. Core lec-
tures supplemented by discussion group focus-
ing on student work. Speakers present cases
involving current projects illustrating the scope
and methods of urban design practice.

D. Frenchman

11.302J Urban Design Politics

(Same subject as 4.253J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines ways urban design contributes to

distribution of political power and resources in
cities, Investigates the nature of relations be-
tween built form and political purposes through
close study of a wide variety of situations
where public sector design commissions and
planning processes have been clearly
motivated by political pressures. Lectures and
discussions focus on specific case studies of
twentieth-century government-sponsored
designs carried out under diverse regimes in
the United States, Europe, and elsewhere.

L. Vale

11.303J Design for Urban Development

(Same subject as 4.254)
Prereq.: 11.447

G (Spring)

2-4-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on development programming and

design and the integration of marketing and
finance with physical planning. Two studio
projects interspersed with lectures, field trips,
and short sketch problems. Offers students a
perspective on the role of the architectural
designer in the development process.

D. Frenchman, P. Roth

11.304J Site and Urban Systems Planning
(Revised Units)

(Same subject as 4.255J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-2-8

The planning of sites and the infrastructure sys-

tems which serve them. Site analysis, spatial
organization of uses on sites, design of road-
ways and subdivision patterns, grading plans,
utility systems, analysis of runoff, parking re-
quirements, traffic and off-site impacts,
landscaping. Lectures on analytical techniques
and examples of good site-planning practice.
Assignments on each aspect of subject.

G. Hack, K. Hill

11.305 Landscape Ecology and Urban
Development

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9 [P/D/F]

Presents a framework for current landscape
ecological theory, structured to encourage ap-
plication in physical planning of landscapes.
Case studies link theory to practice, and in-
clude both urban and rural landscapes.
Science and planning are examined as social
practices which rely on situated knowledge.
Past and present methods of ecological plan-
ning are reviewed and critiqued in a student
project. Major topics include biodiversity, cycli-
cal processes, assessment of landscape struc-
tures, and design for sustainability.

K. Hill

11.306 Impact Assessment Techniques

(11.224)

Prereq.: 11.220

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Methods for predicting and evaluating impact
of development, stressing predictive techni-
ques for use by public officials without formal
training in quantitative methods. Uses both
computer-based modeling and non-quantita-
tive techniques as aids in evaluation of alterna-
tives. Includes traffic, fiscal, employment, and
visual impacts.

Consult Department Headquarters.

11.329J User Needs Programming

(Same subject as 4.266J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.266J.
S. C. Howell

11.330J Theory of City Form

(Same subject as 4.241J)

Prereq.: 11.001J or 4.252J or 11.301J
G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.241J.
J. Beinart

11.331J Advanced Seminar in City Form

(Same subject as 4.242J)

Prereq.: 4.241J, 11.330J

G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.242J.
J. Beinart

11.332J Urban Design

(Same subject as 4.163J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 4.163J.
J. P. de Monchaux, M. Dennis

398 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 2 ---
Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11

11.333J Urban Design Seminar
(New)

(Same subject as 4.244J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

2-0-7

Seminar on the basic theories of urban design.

Includes morphological, structural, and proce-
dural approaches. Case studies of important
urban design efforts. Required for Urban
Design certificate students.

G. Hack

11.335J Cities of Tomorrow

(Same subject as 4.245J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Research seminar on the future of urban

design, to focus on developing a realistic
projection of the organization, function, and
form of cities, based on an analysis of contem-
porary trends. Review of historical efforts in

the tradition of predicting urban change.
Analysis of contemporary urban design

projects and proposals. Supplemented by read-
ings and speakers in parallel fields likely to
have impact on urban form, including informa-
tion processing, communications, entertain-

11.337J Environmental Design Policy and
Action

(Same subject as 4.247J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar on ways that governments influence

the quality of environmental design. Focuses
on the success and failure of methods for
achieving urban design objectives through
various public policy mechanisms: incentives,
standards and regulations, owning and operat-
ing, creation and enforcement of legal rights,
and information-based strategies. Students
complete a research project.

J. P. de Monchaux

11.339 Downtown
(New)

(Subject meets with 21H.234J, 11.026J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

2-0-7

Seminar on downtown in US cities from the

late nineteenth century to the late twentieth.
Emphasis on downtown as an idea, place, and
Cluster of interests, on the changing character
of downtown, and on recent efforts to rebuild
it. Topics considered include subways,
skyscrapers, highways, urban renewal, and
retail centers. Focus on readings, discussions,
and individual research projects. Meets with
undergraduate subject 11.026J, but assign-
ments differ.

R. M. Fogelson, B. J. Frieden

11.340J Legal Issues in the Development
Process

(Same subject as 15.658J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews the legal issues that arise in the

course of acquiring, managing, and developing
real estate. Topics covered include purchase
and sale agreements, organization of the
ownership entity, financing, contracting,
federal income taxation of real estate, fiduciary
relationships, leasing, and workouts.

L. Bacow

Environmental Policy and Planning

11.360 Community Growth and Land Use
Planning

Prereq.: 11.200
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar and fieldwork on strategies of plan-

ning and control for growth and land use, chief-
ly at the municipal level. Growth and its local
consequences; land use planning approaches;
implementation tools including innovative
zoning, subdivision controls, infrastructure sys-
tems, and fiscal techniques. Projects arranged
with small teams serving municipal clients.

T. S. Szold

11.361 Environmental Policy and Regulation

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Examines the role of government in environ-

mental protection. Economic analysis is em-
phasized, but other policy frames are
considered. Traces evolution of US environ-
mental policy from command/control, citizen
empowerment, to current interest in market
manipulation.

P. Levy

11.362 Environmental Management
Prereq.: 11.361

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes national, state, and regional efforts

to plan for the allocation and use of environ-
mental resources. Discussions focus on
strengths and weaknesses of traditional plan-
ning and regulatory mechanisms. Political
obstacles to plan implementation and
strategies for citizens’ participation in environ-
mental policy making receive special attention.
L. E. Susskind

11.363J Chemicals in the Environment:
Policy and Management

(Same subject as TPP.54J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines public policy for managing hazard-
ous substances, including old waste cleanup,
disposal of new wastes, and current use of
hazardous substances. Analyzes use and
limits of risk assessment in and roles of dif-
ferent government and non-governmental ac-
tors in policy formulation and implementation.
Examines policy mechanisms for achieving en-
vironmental goals. Focuses on how new ap-
proaches can overcome failures of past efforts
to reduce toxics in the environment, with em-
phasis on pollution prevention.

V. Norberg-Bohm

11.364 International Environmental
Negotiation

Prereq.: 11.361, 11.362, 11.255
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

This is the fourth subject in the Environmental
Policy and Planning sequence. Seminar looks
at problems of managing common resources,
difficulties of achieving transboundary pollution
control, and the dilemmas of regional har-
monization of environmental protection stand-
ards (particularly in Europe). At the core of
these problems are issues of how best to struc-
ture international negotiations. Focuses espe-
cially on problems of representation voting,
linkage, and enforcement.

L. E. Susskind

11.365J Environmental Management of the
Coast

(Same subject as 13.98J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.98J.
J. T. Kildow

11.366 Planning for Sustainable
Development
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6

Explores policy and planning for sustainable
development. Critically examines concept of
sustainability from social, economic, and
biogeophysical perspectives. Explores path-
ways to sustainability through debates on
limits to growth; poverty and environmental
degradation; technology and financial trans-
fers; and international and intergenerational
equity. Applies these analytical and policy
frameworks to case-studies on resource
management (e.g., soil erosion, water,
fisheries) and industrialization (e.g., on energy,
hazardous wastes).

V. Norberg-Bohm, O. Razzaz

Descriptions of Subjects 399


--- 04.pdf Page 3 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

7—_—_—_—_——— NN

11.367 The Law and Politics of Land Use

Prereq.: 11.200 or 11.360
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of local and state power to regulate

land use and development. Particular em-
phasis on the evolution of planning and zoning
regulations, and the perceived narrowing of
the relationship between public improvements
requirements and development impact. The
ability of regulatory bodies to impose environ-
mental performance standards and limit
development activity is explored in relation to
recent Supreme Court and State SJC
decisions. Development decisions rendered by
public agencies are reviewed, critiqued, and
discussed.

T. S. Szold

11.369 Science and Technology in
Environmental Policy Making

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-1-7

Subject analyzes: 1) techniques for using

scientific information in environmental problem
solving, including risk assessment, technology
assessment, uncertainty analysis, materials
balances, and life-cycle product analysis; 2)
technology as cause of and solution to environ-
mental problems, including concepts of in-
dustrial ecology, technology diffusion and
transfer, and sustainable development; 3) role
of scientific experts in the process of policy for-
mation and implementation.

V. Norberg-Bohm

11.379J Transportation and Government —
Public Policy and Politics

(Same subject as 1.251J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6

See description under subject 1.251J.
F. Salvucci, R. Gakenheimer

11.380J Urban Transportation Planning

(Same subject as 1.252J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Various concepts, planning processes, and

skills to solve urban transportation problems.
Discussion of federal programs. Applications
emphasize current concerns for congestion al-
leviation by various techniques of traffic
management and demand management. Intro-
duces geographic information systems-based
software. Intelligent vehicle and highway sys-
tems. Transportation impacts, intergovernmen-
tal problems.

R. A. Gakenheimer, F. Salvucci, T. Humphrey

11.381J Public Transportation Service and
Operations Planning

(Same subject as 1.258J)

Prereq.: 1.201 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.258J.
N. H. M. Wilson

400 Chapter Vill

11.382J Transit Management

(Same subject as 1.259J)

Prereq.: 1.258J or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.259J.
N. H. M. Wilson, F. Salvucci

11.385J Strategic Analysis for
Environmental Policy Planning, Design,
and Implementation

(Same subject as 1.141J, 3.563, 6.688,

22.822J, TPP.121J)

Prereq.: 1.146 or 2.192 or 3.56 or 13.62 or
16.861 or TPP.21 or 11.200 or 11.205

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.141J.

D. H. Marks, R. de Neutville, J. Clark,

R. Gakenheimer, M. W. Golay, D. Sadoway,
R. D. Tabors

Housing, Community, and Economic
Development

11.40 Introduction to Housing and
Community Development

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Explores how public policy and private markets

affect housing, economic development, and
the local economy; provides an overview of
techniques and specified programs policies
and strategies that are (and have been)
directed at neighborhood development; gives
students an opportunity to reflect on their per-
sonal sense of the housing and community
development process; emphasizes the institu-
tional context within which public and private
actions are undertaken.

L. C. Keyes

11.41 Discourse on Social Policy

(11.510)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-7

Explores an alternative to the dominant “ration-

al actor” model of policy analysis and em-
phasizes the shaping of the policy-making
process through the framing and reframing of
policy discourse. Attempts to place the
dominant model and the alternative in the con-
text of a larger debate on positivism in the so-
cial sciences and a varied body of
interdisciplinary work on “discourse analysis.”
M. Rein

11.410J The Economics of Cities and
Regions

(Same subject as 14.573, 1.283J)
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 14.573J.
W. Wheaton

11.420J Housing and Urban Policy

(Same subject as 4.256J)
Prereq.: 11.200 or 4.144

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of housing markets, consumption, in-
vestment, and policy. Techniques of neighbor-
hood planning, including such issues as
analysis of problem definition, program design,
organizational issues, and strategic planning at
the neighborhood level. Case studies of hous-
ing and neighborhood projects.

P. Clay

11.421 Housing and Human Services

Prereq.: 11.40
G (Spring)
2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on how the housing and human ser-
vice systems interact: how networks and social
capital can build between elements of the two
systems. Explores ways in which the differing
world views, professional perspectives, and in-
stitutional needs of the two systems play out
operationally. Part | establishes the nature of
the action frames of these two systems. Part ||
applies these insights to particular vulnerable
groups: “at risk” households in transitional
housing, the chronically mentally ill, and the
frail elderly.

L. C. Keyes, M. Rein

11.425 Urban Labor Markets

Prereq.: 11.210
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Focuses on the recent evolution of central city
labor markets. Topics include the changing oc-
cupational structure of central cities; the oc-
cupation/population skills mismatch;
education, wages, and urban schooling; the
spatial mismatch and mobility strategies; the
position of minority groups in central city labor
markets; the interaction between welfare
programs and labor markets; the potential role
of job training.

A. Cintron, F. Levy

11.426 Massachusetts Economy and
Economic Development

Prereq.: 11.210 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Every state has a relatively unique set of char-
acteristics that shape its development options.
In the mid-1990s, Massachusetts is charac-
terized by high wage levels and housing
prices, a low rate of population growth, con-
centrations of high-tech firms, and a steady
out-migration of manufacturing jobs. Using
theoretical and empirical studies, subject ex-
amines whether this base can be developed
into an employment structure that benefits
most residents — not just the very well-edu-
cated.

F. Levy


--- 04.pdf Page 4 ---
Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11

11.427J Public Policy and Human
Resources

(Same subject as 15.677J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.677J.
P. Osterman

11.430J Managing the Real Estate
Company
(New)

(Same subject as 15.941J)

Prereq.: 11.431J or 15.412 or 15.415
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on management abilities — to design

innovative strategies and organizations, to
motivate, to negotiate, and to create and sus-
tain learning environments — which are crucial
for success. Case studies from real estate and
other industries illustrate management,
negotiation, and organization theory and con-
cepts. Topics include: globalization and
strategic alliances, strategic planning, industry
and organization restructuring, organization
design and learning, managing organization
change, quality and asset management, inter-
national management, international computer
networks and implementation of information
technology, and ethics. Students are required
to participate in field research projects.

G. Schuck

11.431J Real Estate Finance and
Investment

(Same subject as 15.426J)
Prereq.: 11.447

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concepts and techniques for analyzing finan-

cial decisions in property development and in-
vestment. Topics: leasing and property income
streams, pro forma analysis, equity valuation,
tax analysis, options, risk, and the financial
structuring of real property ownership.

T. Riddiough

11.432J Real Estate Capital Markets

(Same subject as 15,427J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The evolving organization and operation of

real estate capital markets. Sources of real es-
tate capital. Primary and secondary mortgage
markets. The investment behavior of real es-
tate assets. The development of REITs and
securitized debt markets. Advanced pricing
techniques for complex real estate securities.
T. Riddiough

11.433J Real Estate Economics

(Same subject as 15.021J)
Prereq.: 14.01 or 15.010 or 15.011
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on developing an understanding of

the factors that shape and influence markets
for real property. Includes demographic
analysis, patterns of regional growth, construc-
tion cycles, urban location theory, and model-
ing techniques for predicting demand.

W. C. Wheaton

11.437 Financing Community Economic
Development

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Focuses on financing tools and program

models to support local economic develop-
ment. Includes an overview of (1) private capi-
tal markets and financing sources to
understand capital market imperfections that
constrain economic development, (2) business
accounting, (3) financial statement analysis,
and (4) federal economic development
programs. Program models covered include
revolving loan funds, guarantee programs, ven-
ture capital funds, bank holding companies,
community development loan funds and credit
union, micro enterprise fundings, and the use
of the Community Reinvestment Act to
leverage bank financing.

K. Seidman

11.438 Economic Development Planning
and Policy

Prereq.: 11.210, 11.220
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Focuses on the policy tools and planning tech-

niques used to formulate and implement local
economic development strategies. Includes an
overview of economic development theory, dis-
cussion of major policy areas and practices
employed to influence local economic develop-
ment, and detailed review of tools and techni-
ques, to assess local economics and formulate
strategy. Coursework includes formulation of
an economic development strategy for a
locality by the class.

K. F. Seidman

11.441 Issues in Community Development

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-2-4

Centers on current issues in community
development: values, ideology, tactics,

models, and alternative strategies. Seminar for-
mat is organized around students’ planning
projects, and focuses primarily on problem
framing from an interdisciplinary perspective.
Designed for the Community Fellows Program;
students working on thesis or community-
based projects admitted by permission.
Consult Department Headquarters.

11.442 Strategies in Community
Development

Prereq.: 11.441
G (Spring)
3-2-4

Continuation of 11.441. Focuses on alternative
intervention strategies in community-based
development. Seminar format is organized
around students’ planning projects, and
centers on a review of relevant practice in the
field, on formulation of both a detailed interven-
tion strategy, project finding, and effectiveness
evaluation plans. Designed for the Community
Fellows Program; students working on thesis
or community-based projects admitted by per-
mission.

Consult Department Headquarters.

11.447 Housing Finance
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-3

Considers the debt financing process for
residential and multi-family lending. Both the
economic and legal aspects of standard and al-
ternative mortgage instruments are con-
sidered, then combined to develop an
understanding of income property finance.
Mortgage securitization and the secondary
mortgage market also examined.

T. Riddiough

11.449 Perspectives on Labor Markets

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

2-0-7

Divided into three sections: (1) review of major
transformations of labor markets of industrial
societies; (2) exploration of main theoretical
perspectives for understanding these transfor-
mations (neo-classical, Marxist, and institution-
al); (3) critical review of the capacity of these
perspectives to yield an adequate interpreta-
tion of changes in the labor market.

M. Rein

11.450 American Living Standards and
Income Inequality

(Subject meets with 11.022J, 14.65J)
Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent

G (Spring)

3-0-9

Meets with undergraduate subject 11.022J,
but assignments differ. See description under
subject 11.022J.

F. S. Levy

Descriptions of Subjects 401


--- 04.pdf Page 5 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

_ TTT TTT An — —— — — — —— — ——h—

International Development and Regional
Planning

11.462 Housing Problems and Policies in
Developing Countries

Prereq.: 11.205 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the particular attributes, innova-

tions, and methods of analysis of urban land
and housing in developing and transition
countries. Includes an overview of theory on
supply and demand, tenure, standards, and
community participation, detailed review of
tools used in the field, and an examination of
case studies revealing innovations in the field.
Particular emphasis given to affordability and
accessibility by the poor. Class format com-

bines lectures, class projects, and presentation.

O. Razzaz

11.463J Structuring Low-income Housing
Projects in Developing Countries

(Same subject as 4.236J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 4.236J.
R. Goethert

11.464 The Informal Sector and the
Household Economy

Prereq.: 11.205

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines interrelationships among low-in-

come households, small-scale, income-
generating activities, and the urban economy
in developing countries. Theories of employ-
ment and an analysis of “bazaar economies”
looked at. Reviews policy options for enhanc-
ing the informal sector’s contribution to
development. The role of women and the pos-
sibilities of nonmonetary activities explored.

B. Sanyal

11.465J Special Interest Group in Urban
Settlements: SIGUS Workshops

(Same subject as 4.23J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 4.23J.
R. Goethert, R. A. Gakenheimer, B. Sanyal

11.466 Common Property Resources

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Introduces students to conceptual and practi-

cal aspects of managing common resources.
Examines the management issues raised by
distinctive characteristics of various resources
(fisheries, wildlife, water resources, forests,
and land), explores the various institutional
structures and property rights assignments to
such resources, and develops the ability to as-
sess and improve the management of such
resources.

O. Razzaz

11.467J Property Rights Under Transition

(Same subject as 4.257J, 17.550J)
Prereq.: 11.210 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar on different economic, political, and

social perspectives of property rights and their
policy and planning implications. Each year the
theory and applications from two or more key
areas, such as land, natural resources, in-
frastructure, or industrial organization, are
covered.

K. R. Polenske

11.469J Infrastructure in Developing
Countries

(Subject meets with 1.254J, 11.104)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Planning for transport, water supply,
sewerage, etc. Summarizes the technologies
but emphasizes the planning process and
decision points within that are important to
planned objectives. Deals with patterns of con-
sumption, strategies of problems analysis,
technology choices, equity questions, pricing,
finance, building viable public-sector institu-
tions, privatization, relationships between tech-
nocrats and politicians, roles of interest
groups. Meets with undergraduate subject
11.104, but assignments differ.

R. A. Gakenheimer

11.471 Political Economy of Development
Projects: Targeting the Poor

Prereq.: 11.210 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers public-sector policies, programs, and

projects that target the poor in developing
countries and involve small enterprises, small
farmers, cooperatives, nongovernment or-
ganizations, employment-beating programs,
and social investment funds. Links these
programs to the literature on poverty,
economic development, and the reform of
government. Discusses types of projects,
tasks, and environments that are conducive to
equitable outcome.

J. Tendier

11.480 Theory and Practice of Privatization
in Emerging Economics
(New)

Prereq.: 11.205 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the theoretical and practical aspects
of privatization in emerging economies (i.e.
developing countries and postcommunist na-
tions). Analyzes why privatization became an
important policy issue starting in the 1980s;
how such programs were designed and imple-
mented in various countries and industries, in-
cluding infrastructure, manufacturing, and
financial services; and the short-term and long-
term consequences for productivity growth, fis-
cal management, structure of business
enterprise, business-government relations,
and regulation. Also analyzes the opportunities
and risks for private investors, including multi-
national corporations, of participating in
privatization transactions.

A. Amsden

11.481J Regional Economic Theories,
Accounts, and Techniques

(Same subject as 1.284J)
Prereq.: 14.03, 14.04

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys the basic theories, accounting
frameworks, and techniques used in regional
and multiregional economic analyses. Em-
phasizes the aspects of each relevant to their
use in program impact and distribution studies.
Uses problem sets (some microcomputer-
based) to illustrate the different concepts.

K. R. Polenske

11.482J Regional Socioeconomic Impact
Analyses and Modeling

(Same subject as 1.285J)

Prereq.: 11.481J or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews regional economic theories and
models and provides students with experience
in using alternative economic impact assess-
ment models on microcomputers. First two
problem sets are oriented around infrastruc-
ture investments and environmental issues in
Massachusetts. Students may select their own
set of data and region for the third problem set.
K. R. Polenske

11.484 Project Evaluation and Planning in
Developing Countries

Prereq.: 11.205
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Examines techniques and procedures relevant
for project planning and implementation in
developing countries, including project iden-
tification, feasibility analysis, design and im-
plementation monitoring. Considers how to
evaluate economic and distributive effects of
completed or ongoing development projects.
Specific attention given to how institutional set-
ting and other practical influences affect the
use of conventional analytical tools.

P. Smoke

402 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 6 ---
Department of Urban Studies and Planning Course 11

11.486J Economic Institutions and Growth
Policy Analysis

(Same subject as 14.778J, 17.184J)
Prereq.: 17.210

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Considers how institutions have been incor-

porated theoretically into explorations of
growth and development. Four sets of institu-
tions are examined in detail: the corporate sec-
tor, to study how ownership, strategy, and
structure affect growth-related policies; finan-
cial institutions, to analyze how they condition
savings and investment; labor market institu-
tions, to investigate their impact on the deter-
mination of wage and production-related
productivity; and the institutions associated
with technology, such as universities, research
laboratories, and corporate training centers, to
consider how skill formulation is accomplished.
A. Amsden

11.487 Public Finance in Developing
Countries

Prereq.: 11.205 and 11.254 or permission of in-

structor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of the structure and operation of

government systems in developing countries,
with particular emphasis on regional and local
governments. Major topics include: the role of
decentralization in national economic reform
programs; the potential impact of decentral-
ized governments on local economic develop-
ment; determination of optimal arrangements
for sharing fiscal responsibilities among levels
of government; evaluation of local revenue
and expenditure decisions; and assessment of
prospects and options for intergovernmental
fiscal reform. Emphasis on basic economic
concerns, with consideration given to political,
institutional, and cultural factors.

P. Smoke

11.491J Industrial Development and Policy
Analysis

(Same subject as 17.176J)
Prereq.: 11.205

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes the theoretical and historical reasons

why governments in latecomer countries have
intervened with a wide array of policies to
foster industrial development at various turning
points: the initiation of industrial activity; the
diversification of the industrial base; the
restructuring of major industrial institutions;
and the entry into high-technology sectors.

A. Amsden

Planning Support Systems

11.520 A Workshop on Geographic
Information Systems

Prereq.: 1.201 or 11.220, 1.00 or 11.227

G (Spring)
3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the potential use of Geographic In-

formation Systems in land-use planning,
transportation planning, and town government.
Subject format is a studio setting with a local
town government as a client. Begins with
theory and use of GIS technology. Students
select one of two middle segments focusing on
a) a user-needs assessment and the develop-
ment of skills in interview techniques, case
studies, and unobtrusive measures; or b) the
design of appropriate land use and transporta-
tion models. The third segment integrates the
work of both groups in developing the
prototype GIS.

J. Ferreira, Jr., Q. Shen

11.521 Computer-Based Analysis for Public
Management

Prereq.: 11.227
G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Extends the computer and analytic skills

developed in 11.227 to more advanced topics
and problems. Includes advanced database
management concepts and applications of
SQL (Structured Query Language). Computer-
implemented models for improved public
management are studied, including decision
support and geographic information systems.
J. Ferreira, Jr., M. Shifter

11.522 Research Seminar on Planning
Support Systems

Prereq.: 11.227, 11.520, or 11.521
G (Fall)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced seminar extends computer and

analytic skills developed in the other subjects
in this sequence into a research environment.
Students present a structured discussion of a
journal article representative of current re-
search in Planning Decision Support Systems,
and complete an approved short research
project. Suggested research projects include
topics related to ongoing research projects of
the Computer Resource Laboratory.

J. Ferreira, Jr., Q. Shen, M. Shiffer

11.525 New and Developing Technologies
for Planners

Prereq.: 11.227 and 11.228 or permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)

2-2-5 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Students are familiarized with the changing
technologies available for manipulating, or-
ganizing, and presenting visually-oriented
electronic information for the description of
urban environmental phenomena. Students
are exposed to cases where these tech-
nologies have been used, or are in use, by
planning-related agencies. Impacts of these
technologies upon public debate and decision
making are studied. Specific attention is paid
to multimedia and communication tech-
nologies and how these have the ability to
change the way people plan.

M. Shiffer

11.526J Logistical and Transportation
Planning Methods

(Same subject as 1.203J, 6.281J, 13.665J,
15.073J, 16.76J)

Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.203J.
A. |. Barnett, R. C. Larson, A. R. Odoni

Tutorials, Research, and Field
Work Subjects

11.800 Doctoral Research Paper

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Required subject for all entering Ph.D. stu-
dents. Main focus is on formulating re-
searchable questions. Designed to help
students write their first-year papers.

M. Schuster, M. Rein

11.900 Doctoral Proseminars

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Designed primarily for advanced doctoral can-
didates. A selection of Proseminars is offered
each year for groups of students affiliated with
the various research clusters in the Depart-
ment.

B, Sanyal

Descriptions of Subjects 403


--- 04.pdf Page 7 ---
School of Architecture and Planning

11.901 Research Seminar: Topics in Urban
Studies and Planning

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

11.902 Research Seminar: Topics in Urban

Studies and Planning

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Special research issues in urban planning,

selected each term for special study. Open to
graduate students with permission of instructor.
B. Sanyal

11.911, 11.912 Supervised Readings in
Urban Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in

urban studies and planning.
P. Clay

11.921, 11.922 Special Seminars in Real
Estate Development

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-

dents on current topics related to real estate
not otherwise included in the curriculum.
Consult W. Wheaton.

11.932 Preparation for Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Selection of thesis subject, definition of
method of approach, and preparation of
preliminary thesis outline. Independent study,
supplemented by frequent individual con-
ference with staff members. Restricted to doc-
toral candidates.

B. Sanyal

11.941-11.955 Special Studies in Urban
Studies and Planning

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Small-group study of advanced subjects under

staff supervision. For graduate students wish-
ing to pursue further study in advanced areas
of urban studies and city and regional planning
not covered in regular subjects of instruction.
11.941 is taught P/D/F.

B. Sanyal

11.956—11.957 IAP Special Studies in Urban
Studies and Planning

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (IAP)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Planned subjects of instruction for use during
IAP only.
B. Sanyal

11.958-11.959 IAP Special Studies in Urban
Studies and Planning

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (IAP)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Planned subjects of instruction for use during
IAP only.
B. Sanyal

11.960, 11.961 IAP Special Studies in Real
Estate

Prereq.: —

G (IAP)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Planned subjects of instruction for use during
IAP only.
W. Wheaton

11.962 Urban Fieldwork and Internships

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Practical application of planning techniques to
towns, cities, and regions, including problems
of replanning, redevelopment, and renewal of
existing communities. Includes internships,
under staff supervision, in municipal and state
agencies and departments.

J. Ferreira, Jr., G. Hack, L. C. Keyes,

L. E. Susskind, J. Tendler

11.981 Graduate Tutorial

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

11.982 Graduate Tutorial

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

Units a

Can be repeated for credit

Planned programs of individual instruction. Stu-
dents and faculty members must make arran-
gements prior to the beginning of the term.

B. Sanyal

11.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research and writing of
thesis; to be arranged by the student with su-
pervising committee.

Staff

404 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 8 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

Course 12

Undergraduate Subjects

12.UR Undergraduate Research
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

12.URG Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in

Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences.
Consult Department Headquarters.

12.IND Independent Study

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Independent reading, laboratory, or fieldwork

in Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Scien-
ces. Requires written report. To be arranged
by student and an appropriate MIT faculty
member.

Consult Department Headquarters.

12.ThU Undergraduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of undergraduate research, leading

to the writing of a thesis; to be arranged by the
student and an appropriate MIT faculty mem-
ber.

Consult Department Headquarters.

Earth, Atmospheric, and
Planetary Sciences

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of Science.

Core and General Science
Subjects

12.001 Introduction to Geology

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-4-5 REST

Major rock-forming minerals, rock-forming

processes, and rock types. Geologic structures
and relationships observable in the field.
Geologic time scale, dating of rocks by fossil
and isotopic methods. Sediment movement
and landform development by moving water,
wind, and ice. Crustal processes and evolution
in terms of global plate tectonics. Geologic his-
tory of the continents, with emphasis on North
America. Laboratories on minerals, rocks, fos-
sils, and mapping. Two nonrequired one-day
field trips.

J. B. Southard

12.002 Physics and Chemistry of the Solid
Earth

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-1-8 REST

Study of the Earth’s structure, composition,

and physical processes. Introduction to plate
tectonics, earthquakes, seismic waves, and
theology. The Earth’s gravity and magnetic
fields, heat flux, and thermal structure. Plates
as thermal and chemical boundary layers.
Mantle convection, properties of the Earth's
deep interior, geomagnetism, core dynamics.
Employs classical mechanics, electromag-
netism, some elementary differential equa-
tions. Suitable for majors and non-majors
seeking general background in geophysics
and Earth structure.

C. J. Marone

12.003 Physics of the Fluid Earth

Prereq.: 18.02, 8.01, 5.60
U (Fall)
3-1-8 REST

The laws of classical mechanics and ther-
modynamics are used to explore how the
properties of fluids on a rotating planet, such
as the Earth, manifest themselves in, and help
shape, the global patterns of atmospheric
winds, ocean currents, and the climate of the
Earth. Underlying mechanisms are illustrated
using a rotating table and through the study of
numerous phenomena drawn from the atmos-
phere and ocean, such as hurricanes,
thunderstorms, and ocean circulation. A
laboratory acquaints students with meteorologi-
cal and oceanographic data.

R. A. Plumb

12.004 Introduction to Planetary Science

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Study of the solar system with emphasis on
physical processes. Topics include:
meteorites, orbital dynamics, asteroids, impact
craters, surfaces, atmospheres, atmospheric
dynamics, interiors, magnetospheres, rings,
comets, formation of the solar system.

T. Dowling, M. Zuber

12.005 Applications of Continuum
Mechanics to Earth, Atmospheric, and
Planetary Sciences

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.02, 18.03
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Practical applications of the continuum con-
cept for deformation of solids and fluids, em-
phasizing force balance. Stress tensor,
infinitesimal and finite strain, and rotation ten-
sors developed. Constitutive relations ap-
plicable to geological materials, including
elastic, viscous, brittle, and plastic deforma-
tion. Solutions to classical problems in
geodynamics, physical oceanography, and at-
mospheric sciences.

B. H. Hager

Descriptions of Subjects 405


--- 04.pdf Page 9 ---
School of Science

LL

12.006 Chaos and Complexity

Prereq.: 18.03, 8.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Introduction to the theory and phenomenology
of nonlinear dynamics and chaos in dissipative
systems. Forced and parametric oscillators.
Phase space. Periodic, quasiperiodic, and
aperiodic flows. Sensitivity to initial conditions
and strange attractors. Lorenz attractor. Period
doubling, intermittency, and quasiperiodicity.
Universality. Analysis of experimental data:
Fourier transforms, Poincaré sections, fractal
dimension, and Lyapunov exponents. Applica-
tions drawn from fluid dynamics, physics,
geophysics, and chemistry.

D. H. Rothman

12.090 Special Topics in Earth,

Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

12.091 Special Topics in Earth,

Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory or field work in earth, atmospheric,

and planetary sciences. To be arranged with
department faculty. Consult with department
Education Office.

EAPS Faculty

12.092 Special Topics in Geology and
Geochemistry

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

12.093 Special Topics in Geology and
Geochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory or field work in geology and
geochemistry. To be arranged with department
faculty. Consult with department Education Of-
fice.

EAPS Faculty

12.094 Special Topics in Geophysics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

12.095 Special Topics in Geophysics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory or field work in geophysics. To be

arranged with department faculty. Consult with
department Education Office.
EAPS Faculty

12.096 Special Topics in Atmospheric
Science and Oceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

12.097 Special Topics in Atmospheric
Science and Oceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory or field work in atmospheric
science and oceanography. To be arranged
with department faculty. Consult with depart-
ment Education Office.

EAPS Faculty

12.098 Special Topics in Planetary Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

12.099 Special Topics in Planetary Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Laboratory or field work in planetary science.

To be arranged with department faculty. Con-
sult with department Education Office.
EAPS Faculty

Geology and Geochemistry

12.102 Environmental Earth Science
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 REST

The geologic record demonstrates that our en-

vironment has changed over a variety of time
scales from seconds to billions of years. Sub-
ject explores the many ways in which geologic
processes control and modify the Earth’s en-
vironment. Topics include: chemical and physi-
cal interactions between the solid Earth, its
oceans and atmosphere; the effect of
catastrophic events such as volcanic eruptions
and earthquakes on the environment; geologic
hazards; and our role in modifying the environ-
ment through earth resource development.
This subject serves as an introduction to sub-
ject 12.120, which addresses field applications
of these principles in the American Southwest.
S. A. Bowring, J. B. Southard

12.104 Geochemistry of the Earth and
Planets

Prereq.: 18.02

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-1-8

Focuses on the processes that create chemi-
cal variability in the solid and fluid earth, the
moon, and meteorites. Includes nucleosyn-
thesis, cosmochemistry, and basic geochemi-
cal concepts. Thermodynamics and phase
equilibria are introduced and applied to
problems of melting solid planetary interiors
and the evolution of the earth's hydrosphere.
Radiogenic and stable isotopic systems are
used to document the timing of planetary for-
mation and differentiation, formation, and
evolution of volcanoes and continental crust,
and to understand interactions between the
solid and fluid earth.

J. Edmond, F. A. Frey, T. L. Grove

12.108 Structure of Earth Materials

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-4-5

Provides a comprehensive introduction to crys-
talline structure, crystal chemistry, and bond-
ing in rock-forming minerals. Introduces the
theory relating crystal structure and crystal
symmetry to physical properties such as refrac-
tive index, elastic modulus, and seismic
velocity. Surveys the distribution of silicate,
oxide, and metallic minerals in the interiors
and on the surfaces of planets and discusses
the processes that led to their formation.

B. Evans, T. L. Grove

12.109 Petrology

Prereq.: 12.104, 12.108

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-6-3

Surveys the distribution, chemical composition,
and mineral associations in rocks of the earth's
crust and upper mantle, and establishes their
relation to tectonic environment. Emphasis is
on the use of chemistry and physics to inter-
pret rock forming processes. Topics include:
dynamics of crust and mantle melting as
preserved in the chemical composition of ig-
neous rocks and minerals, the long-term
record of global climate change as preserved
in the minerals of sedimentary rocks, and the
time-temperature-depth record preserved in
minerals of metamorphosed cruStal rocks.

J. P. Grotzinger, T. L. Grove, K. V. Hodges

406 Chapter VIII


--- 04.pdf Page 10 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

12.110 Sedimentary Geology
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: 12.001

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6

Sediments in the rock cycle. Production of sedi-

ments at the Earth’s surface. Physics and
chemistry of sedimentary materials. Scale and
geometry of near-surface sedimentary bodies,
including aquifers. Sediment transport and
deposition in modern sedimentary environ-
ments. Burial and lithification. Survey of major
sedimentary rock types. Stratigraphic relation-
ships of sedimentary basins. Evolution of
sedimentary processes through geologic time.
Two or three weekend days of field trips.

J. B. Southard, J. P. Grotzinger

12.113 Structural Geology

Prereq.: 12.001, 12.005

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-3-6

Introduces mechanics of rock deformation. Dis-

cusses recognition, interpretation, and
mechanics of faults, folds, structural features
of igneous and metamorphic rocks, and super-
posed deformations. Introduces regional struc-
tural geology and tectonics. Laboratory
includes techniques of structural analysis,
recognition and interpretation of structures on
geologic maps, and construction of interpretive
cross sections.

B. C. Burchfiel

12.114 Field Geology |

Prereq.: 12.108, 12.113, or permission of in-

structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
2-2-2

Introduces techniques of geological field study.

Several weekend field exercises provide practi-
cal experience in preparation for 12.115.
Presents, in addition, introductory material on
the regional geology of the locale of 12.115.

B. C. Burchfiel, J. P. Grotzinger, K. V. Hodges,
L. H. Royden

12.115 Field Geology Il

Prereq.: 12.113, 12.114

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (IAP, Spring)
0-18-0 Institute LAB

During January, practices methods of modern

geological field study during an intensive four-
week excursion. Exercises include geological
mapping on topographic and photographic
base maps, correlating geochemical and
geophysical field measurements with geology,
examining and sampling a wide variety of
geological features. Following term includes 1)
preparation of reports based on field studies
conducted during January, and 2) laboratory
analysis of samples, interpretation of geologi-
cal, geophysical, and geochemical data. 12
units may be applied to the General Institute
Laboratory Requirement.

8. C. Burchfiel, J. P. Grotzinger, K. V. Hodges,
L. H. Royden

12.119 Analytical Techniques for Studying

Environmental and Geologic Samples

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
2-6-4 Institute LAB

Focuses on analytical facilities that are used to

determine elemental and isotopic abundances
in soils, rocks, minerals, and fluids. Emphasis
is on isotopic ratios Sr, Nd, and Pb, whose
isotopic ratios can be used for age dating, and
abundances of trace elements such as Rb, Sr,
Cu, Cd, Hg, rare-earths, Pb, Th, and U. Analyti-
cal techniques include mass spectrometry,
emission spectrometry, atomic absorption,
neutron activation, and electron microprobe. A
major lab project utilizes these techniques to
address specific environmental and geologic
problems, Each student generates a report
that may be used to satisfy Phase II of the Writ-
ing Requirement.

S. Bowring, E. Boyle, F. Frey, T. Grove

12.120 Environmental Earth Science Field
Course

Prereq.: 12.001 or 12.102
U (IAP)
1-5-0

Introduction to the methods of geologic map-

ping; practical experience in aspects of en-
vironmental geology such as selecting sites for
hazardous waste disposal, hazard assessment
in seismically and volcanically active areas,
and in understanding the three-dimensional
character of dissected alluvial deposits.

S. Bowring

12.130 Structure of Geologic Aquifers

(Subject meets with 12.465)

Prereq.: 12.110 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-3-6

Meets with graduate subject 12.465, but as-

signments differ. See description under 12.465.
J. P. Grotzinger, J. B. Southard, C. J. Marone

12.141 Electron Microprobe Analysis

Prereq.: —
U (IAP)
1-1-4 [P/D/F]

Introduction to theory of x-ray microanalysis

through Electron Microprobe; lab sessions, in-
cluding analysis of materials with hands-on
use of the microprobe; analytical methods in-
clude energy and wavelength dispersive
spectrometry and backscattered electron imag-

ing.
T. Grove, N. Chatterjee

12.159 Sedimentary and Surficial Geology
Investigations

(New)

(Subject meets with 12.459)

Prereq.: 12.110 or permission of instructor

U (Spring)

3-6-3

Can be repeated for credit

Meets with graduate subject 12.459, but as-

signments differ. See description under 12.459.
J. P. Grotzinger, J. B. Southard, K. X. Whipple

12.163 Surface Processes and Landscape
Evolution
(New)

(Subject meets with 12.463)
Prereq.: 8.01; 18.03

U (Fall)

3-3-6

Meets with graduate subject 12.463, but as-
signments differ. See description under 12.463.
K. X. Whipple

Geophysics

12.201 Essentials of Geophysics

(Subject meets with 12.501)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03

U (Fall)

4-0-8

See description under subject 12.501.
R. D. van der Hilst

12.213 Alternate Energy Sources

Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

1-4-1 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Explores a number of alternative energy sour-
ces such as geothermal energy (heat from the
Earth’s interior), wind, natural gas, and solar
energy. Includes a field trip to visit sites where
alternative energy is being harvested or
generated. Content and focus of subject varies
from year to year.

M. N. Toks6z, F. D. Morgan

12.214 Environmental Geophysics

(Subject meets with 12.507)

Prereq.: 18.03

U (Spring)

3-3-6

Meets with graduate subject 12.507, but as-
signments differ. See description under subject
12.507.

F. D. Morgan

12.215 Modern Navigation

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-1-8

Introduces the concepts and applications of
navigation techniques using celestial bodies
and satellite positioning systems such as the
Global Positioning System (GPS). Topics in-
clude astronomical observations, radio naviga-
tion systems, the relationship between
conventional navigation results and those ob-
tained from GPS, and the effects of the
security systems, Selective Availability, and
anti-spoofing on GPS results. Laboratory ses-
sions cover the use of sextants, astronomical
telescopes, and field use of GPS. Application
areas covered include ship, automobile, and
aircraft navigation and positioning, including
very precise positioning applications.

T. A. Herring

Descriptions of Subjects 407


--- 04.pdf Page 11 ---
School of Science

—_—-—————————————— —— —— — ———— ———— ———— — — ———— — — ee _

12.221 Geophysical Applications of the
Global Positioning System

1-4-1 [P/D/F]

Introduction to the science of accurate deter-

mination of a position on Earth using radio sig-
nals from satellites, or the Global Positioning
System (GPS). Uses GPS to address, specifi-
cally, earthquake risk and prediction. Includes
a field trip of three to four days duration.

T. A. Herring, B. H. Hager, R. King

Meteorology and Oceanography

12.300 Global Change Science
Prereq.: 18.03; 5.60

U (Fall)

3-0-9

Introduces the basic relevant principles and

concepts in atmospheric chemistry and
physics, climate dynamics, biogeochemistry,
and environmental policy making, through an
examination of two current problems in the
global environment: 1) carbon dioxide and
global warming, and 2) chlorofluorocarbons
and ozone. An introduction to global environ-
mental problems for students in basic sciences
and engineering.

R. G. Prinn, P. H. Stone

12.301 Past and Present Climate

(Subject meets with 12.840)
Prereq.: 8.02

U (Spring)

3-0-9

Meets with graduate subject 12.840, but as-

signments differ. See description under subject
12.840.
R. E. Newell

12.305 Global Atmospheric Pollution

Prereq.: 8.02
U (Fall)
2-0-4

Increasing industrial activity and biomass burn-

ings have produced pollution patterns now
detectable world-wide. In 1996-97, subject
concentrates on material reaching the atmos-
phere from Pacific Rim countries and
measured over the Pacific from specially instru-
mented aircraft in 1991, 1994, and 1996.
Space shuttle measurements on global carbon
monoxide also discussed. Atmospheric and
oceanic structure necessary to understand the
transport processes and photochemical sour-
ces and sinks of constituents, which in some
cases provide natural removal processes, is
presented. Students examine possible sour-
ces, including fossil fuel use, volcanic activity,
biomass burning, and oceanic biosphere.

R. E. Newell

12.310 An Introduction to Weather
Forecasting

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.01
U (IAP)
1-1-4 [P/D/F]

Basic principles of synoptic meteorology and

weather forecasting. Analysis of hourly
weather data and numerical weather predic-
tion models. Regular preparation of weather
forecasts.

L. Nari

12.311 Experimental Oceanography

Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

2-2-2 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

An intensive introduction to the experimental
aspects of oceanography, specifically in the
areas of marine geology and geophysics,
physical oceanography, and chemical
oceanography. Includes participation in a re-
search cruise. Content varies from year to year.
M. McNutt, J. Marshall, J. Edmond, WHO! Staff

12.312 Climate System Computer Lab

Prereq.: —
U (IAP)
0-2-4 [P/D/F]

Introduction to climate dynamics and the
hands-on use of computer simulation models;
investigation of the interaction between atmos-
phere, oceans, ice, and carbon cycle; applica-
tions include greenhouse effect and ice age
onset.

J. Marotzke

12.313 Climate Change: Past, Present, and
Future

Prereq.: —
U (IAP)
2-0-4 [P/D/F]

The human race is now a significant factor in-
fluencing global changes in the Earth's environ-
ment and climate. Subject provides a historical
(as in geological) context within which to think
about global climate change. Covers the entire
spectrum of climate variations, from the forma-
tion of the Earth’s early atmosphere 4.6 billion
years ago, to the ice ages, to the role of CO2
variations in natural climate change, to
temperature trends in this century.

M. E. Raymo

12.320J Introduction to Hydrology

(Same subject as 1.71J)

Prereq.: 1.03, 1.05, or equivalents
U (Fall)

3-0-9

See description under subject 1.71J.
D. Entekhabi

12.330J Fluid Physics

(Same subject as 8.292J)

Prereq.: 8.044 or 5.60 or permission of instruc-
tor

U (Spring)

3-0-9

A physics-based introduction to the properties
of fluids and fluid systems, with examples
drawn from a broad range of sciences. Defini-
tions of fluids and the notion of continuum.
Equations of state and continuity; conservation
of momentum; the stress tensor; ideal fluids
and Euler’s equation; viscosity and Navier-
Stokes equation. Hydrostatics and mag-
netohydrodynamics. Energy considerations,
fluid thermodynamics, and isentropic flow.
Compressible vs incompressible and rotational
vs irrotational flow; Bernoulli's theorem; steady
flow and streamlines. Circulation and vorticity.
Thomson's theorem, Boundary layers. Fluid
waves and instabilities.

K. Emanuel, P. Joss

12.331 Fluid Dynamics of the Atmosphere
and Ocean

(Subject meets with 12.800)
Prereq.: 8.03, 18.04

U (Fall)

3-0-9

See description under subject 12.800.
J. Marshall

12.332 Wave Motions in the Ocean and
Atmosphere

(Subject meets with 12.802)
Prereq.: 12.331

U (Spring)

3-0-9

See description under subject 12.802.
C. Wunsch

12.333 Atmospheric and Ocean Circulation

Prereq.: 12.003
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Survey of atmospheric and oceanic
phenomena including the discussion of obser-
vations and theoretical interpretations. Topics
covered include: monsoons; El Nifo; planetary
waves; atmospheric synoptic eddies and
fronts; gulf stream rings; hurricanes; surface
and internal gravity waves; tides; the strato-
sphere and ozone.

R. A. Plumb

408 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 12 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

12.335 The Ocean in Climate: Physics and
Chemistry

Prereq.: 18.03, 5.60, or equivalents
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Provides the background in physical and
chemical oceanography necessary to discuss
climate problems in light of modern oceanic
knowledge. Observations of the ocean and
their physical interpretation in terms of tur-
bulent flow. Implications of recent progress in
general circulation modeling. Oceanic carbon
system and global carbon cycle: chemical equi-
librium, biological/nutrient controls, radioactive
and stable carbon isotopes. Introduction to
chemical modeling. Fate of fossil fuel CO2.
Past variability of circulation and carbon sys-
tem from ice and sediment cores. Intended for
advanced undergraduates and beginning
graduates.

E. Boyle, C. Wunsch

12.337 Tropical Meteorology

(Subject meets with 12.811)
Prereq.: 12.331

U (Spring)

3-0-9

See description under subject 12.811.
R. A, Plumb

12.338 Introduction to Atmospheric Data
and Synoptic Meteorology
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 12.818)

Prereq.: 12.003 and 12.330J or 12.331
U (Spring)

3-3-6

See description under subject 12.818.
L. Ilari, E. Chang

12.340J Atmospheric Chemistry

(Subject meets with 5.23J, 5.68)
Prereq.: 5.60

U (Spring)

3-0-9

Describes the principles that govern the chemi-
cal behavior of terrestrial and planetary atmos-
pheres. Reviews chemical reactions and
biogeochemical cycles that control the abun-
dance of trace species in the troposphere and
stratosphere. Emphasis is placed on the poten-
tially damaging effects of human activity on the
chemical balance of the atmosphere. Covers
stratospheric ozone depletion, regional and
local photochemical smog, and greenhouse
gases.

M. J. Molina, J. |. Steinfeld

Planetary Science and Astronomy

12.400 The Solar System
Prereq.: 8.01

U (Fall)

3-0-9 REST

Introduction to the study of the solar system

with emphasis on the latest spacecraft results.
Subject covers basic principles rather than
detailed mathematical and physical models.
Topics include an overview of the solar sys-
tem, planetary orbits, rings, planetary forma-
tion, meterorites, asteroids, comets, planetary
surfaces and cratering, planetary interiors,
planetary atmospheres, and life in the solar
system.

R. P. Binzel

12.401 Beyond the Solar System

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
2-2-5

Our solar system’s place in the universe and

how we know it, taught by a combination of
conventional lectures and hands-on work with
small telescopes and computers. The forma-
tion, evolution, and death of stars and
galaxies. The origins of the chemical elements.
Quasars and black holes. Radiation and
gravitation. Relativity and cosmology. The
physics of modern astronomical observations
C. C. Counselman

12.409 Hands-On Astronomy: Observing
Stars and Planets
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

Background for and techniques of visual obser-

vation, astrophotography, electronic imaging,
and spectroscopy of the Moon, planets, satel-
lites, stars, and brighter deep-space objects.
Weekly observing sessions using 8-inch
diameter telescopes outdoors when weather
permits. Indoor sessions introduce needed
skills. Introduction to contemporary observa-
tional astronomy including astronomical com-
puting, image and data processing, and how
astronomers work. Student must maintain a
careful and complete written log which is
graded. (Limited enrollment. Consumes an en-
tire evening each week; attendance man-
datory.)

C. C. Counselman, S. Slivan

12.410J Observational Techniques of
Optical Astronomy

(Same subject as 8.287J)

Prereq.: One subject in Astronomy or
Astrophysics

U (Fall)

2-4-6 Institute LAB

Fundamental physical and optical principles
used for astronomical measurements at visible
wavelengths and practical methods of
astronomical observations. Topics: astronomi-
cal coordinates, time, geometrical optics, tele-
scopes, photon counting, signal-to-noise
ratios, data analysis (including least-squares
model fitting), limitations imposed by the
Earth's atmosphere on optical observations,
CCD, photometry, spectroscopy, and time
variability. Project at Wallace Astrophysical Ob-
servatory.

J. L. Elliot

12.411 Astronomy Field Camp

Prereq.: 12.410J or 8.287J
U (IAP)

0-6-3 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Supervised research at Lowell Observatory in
Flagstaff, Arizona. Individual projects using the
Lowell 1.1 meter and 1.8 meter telescopes. Ex-
tensive data analysis. Written report required.
Enrollment limited.

J. L. Elliot

12.412 Advanced Astronomical Techniques

Prereq.: 12.410J or 8.287J; permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

3-0-9

Can be repeated for credit

Students learn advanced astronomical techni-
ques such as image processing of data ob-
tained with charged-coupled device (CCD)
detectors and are responsible for developing
and carrying out a short-term research project.
The primary tool is the IRAF image analysis
software package developed by the National
Optical Astronomical Observatories. Regular
seminar meetings introduce image-processing
techniques and include discussion of the
progress of research projects. Requires a writ-
ten report on the project.

R. P. Binzel

12.421 Exploration of the Solar System

Prereq.: 8.03; 12.004

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Spacecraft and Earth-based remote sensing
techniques used to study the Earth and other
planets, satellites, rings, minor planets, and
comets. Techniques covered include
ultraviolet, optical, and infrared photometry;
radar; stellar and radio occultations; spectros-
copy, and in situ measurements. Recent
results from spacecraft emphasized.

R. P. Binzel, J. L. Elliott, C. C. Counselman

Descriptions of Subjects 409


--- 04.pdf Page 13 ---
School of Science

Graduate Subjects

12.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the

writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member.

Consult Department Headquarters.

Geology and Geochemistry

12.450 Seminar in Geology and
Geochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on topics of current interest in geol-

ogy and geochemistry. Required background
preparation for students taking pre-doctoral
general examinations in these subjects.

T. L. Grove

12.451 Seminar in Regional Tectonics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Applies techniques of tectonic synthesis to

study the roles of particular orogenic belts in
global plate tectonics. Treats different applica-
tions in different terms, so that the subject may
be taken repeatedly to learn the range of
orogenic responses to temporal and spatial
variations of activity at plate boundaries.

B. C. Burchfiel, J. P. Grotzinger, K. V. Hodges,
L. H. Royden

12.452 Mechanics of Sedimentary
Processes

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Aspects of turbulent-flow mechanics relevant

to sediment movement. Mechanics of sedi-
ment erosion, transportation, and deposition:
modes of particle entrainment and motion in
turbulent shear flows; sediment-bed configura-
tions; erosion and deposition of cohesive sedi-
ments. Sediment gravity flows; sorting of
sediments by particle size and density. Inter-
pretation of primary structures and textures in
modern and ancient sedimentary deposits on
the basis of sediment-transportation
mechanics.

J. B. Southard

12.453 Crosby Lectures in Geology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

A series of presentations on an advanced

topic in the field of geology by the visiting Wil-
liam Otis Crosby lecturer. The Crosby lec-
tureship is awarded to a distinguished
international scientist each year to introduce
new scientific perspectives to the MIT com-
munity. Subject content and structure vary
from year to year.

Consult Department Headquarters for addition-
al information.

12.455 Megascopic Strain Analysis in
Orogenic Belts

Prereq.: 12.113

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to modern techniques used to es-

timate the magnitude of strain in orogenic
belts. Emphasis on megascopic strain
analysis. Includes 1) methods of determining
sense of shear in various structural settings; 2)
the construction of 2D-balanced structural sec-
tions; 3) the construction of 3D structural sec-
tions; and 4) graphical reconstruction of 2D
and 3D sections to pre-deformational con-
figurations.

K. V. Hodges

12.456 Seminar in Rock Mechanics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discussion of current research or advanced

topics in continental tectonics, rock mechanics,
or experimental structural geology.
B. Evans

12.457 Sedimentary Basins

Prereq.: 18.03, 12.113

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Formation and evolution of basin systems in

continental crust (including passive continental
margins, foredeep acretionary basins, back-
arc type basins, intraplate rifts, etc.) are ex-
amined with regard to tectonic settings,
structural and sedimentary features, and deep
lithospheric processes. Case studies of
several sedimentary basins of each type.

L. H. Royden, J. P. Grotzinger

12.459 Sedimentary and Surficial Geology
Investigations
(Revised Content)

(Subject meets with 12.159)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

In-depth examination of modern and ancient
depositional systems, Earth-surface landforms,
and surficial processes, utilizing concepts of
process sedimentology and geomorphology,
sequence stratigraphy, and sedimentary basin
analysis.

J. P. Grotzinger, J. B. Southard, K. X. Whipple

12.460—-12.461 Special Problems in
Geology-Geochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students desiring to perform spe-
cial investigations, special laboratory work, or
special fieldwork in geology, petrology, mineral-
ogy or geochemistry. 12.460 is letter-graded.
Geology and Geochemistry Staff

12.463 Surface Processes and Landscape
Evolution
(New)

(Subject meets with 12.163)
Prereq.: 8.01; 18.03

G (Fall)

3-3-6

Examines the interaction of climate, tectonics,
and surface processes in the sculpting of the
Earth's surface. Quantitative introduction to
mechanics of fluvial, hillslope, and glacial
processes. Essentials of weathering, soil for-
mation, runoff, erosion, slope stability, sedi-
ment transport, river morphology, glacial
erosion, and volcanism. System responses to
climatic and tectonic forcings, including: glacia-
tion, sea level change, uplift, subsidence, and
post-glacial isostatic rebound. Additional in-
struction in: computer modeling in the study of
surface processes, image analysis, and GIS
applications in surface hydrology and slope
stability.

K. X. Whipple

410 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 14 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

12.465 Structure of Geologic Aquifers
(New)

(Subject meets with 12.130)

Prereq.: 12.110 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

intended for earth scientists and engineers
who require a knowledge of the structure and
complexity of shallow to deeply-buried
sedimentary aquifers. Content focuses on the
analysis of depositional systems and facies
and architecture; the nature and origin of
geometry and scales of vertical and lateral in-
homogeneity; reconstruction of sedimentary
basins and their interpretation; quantitative
methods of spatial and temporal correlation;
numerical forward modeling and use of simula-
tion in characterization of aquifer geometry.
Two field trips explore unconsolidated as well
as lithified sediments.

J. P. Grotzinger, J. B. Southard, C. J. Marone

12.467 Seminar in Geomorphology
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discussion of current research or advanced

topics in landscape evolution, surface hydrol-
ogy, mechanics of sediment transport, basin
analysis, or experimental geomorphology. Ad-
vanced instruction in process geomorphology.
K. X. Whipple

12.474 Origin and Evolution of the Earth’s
Crust

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Broad overview of the origin and evolution of

Earth’s crust and mantle with emphasis on the
study of the Precambrian rock record. Topics
include: processes of crustal growth, stabiliza-
tion, and reactivation; evaluation of secular
change; and use of radiogenic isotopes in
geochronology and as tracers of crust forming
processes.

S. Bowring

12.475 Global Plate Tectonics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

First half covers basic elements of plate tec-

tonics, including sea floor spreading, magnetic
anomalies, and subduction zone. Second half
covers implications of plate tectonics for con-
tinental processes, including continental rifting,
continental collision, and mountain building.
Emphasis will be on correlating plate tectonic
and continental processes using specific ex-
amples from around the world.

8. C. Burchfiel, L. H. Royden

12.476 Radiogenic Isotope Geology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Applications of the variations in the relative

abundance of radiogenic isotopes to problems
of petrology, geochemistry, and tectonics.
Topics: geochronology; isotopic evolution of
earth’s crust and mantle, petrogenesis, analyti-
cal techniques.

S. Bowring

12.478 Pressure-Temperature-Time
Evolution of Orogenic Belts

Prereq.: 3.01 or 5.60; 12.109, 18.03
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Multidisciplinary introduction to modern techni-

ques used to analyze burial and uplift histories
of metamorphic terrains. Includes 1)
geochronologic systems; 2) closure tempera-
ture theory and the use of geochronologic sys-
tems as thermochronometers; 3)
geothermometry and geobarometry; 4) ther-
modynamic modeling of P-T paths; 5) thermal
structure of orogenic belts, with emphasis on
characteristic length scales and time scales for
thermal events; 6) geophysical analysis of
burial and uplift trajectories for metamorphic
terrains.

K. V. Hodges, L. H. Royden

12.479 Trace-Element Geochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on element distribution in rocks and

minerals using data obtained from natural and
experimental systems. Emphasizes models
describing trace-element partitioning and ap-
plications of trace-element geochemistry to
problems in igneous geology.

F. A. Frey

12.480 Advanced Igneous Petrology

Prereq.: 5.60 or 3.00

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Thermodynamics, experimental phase equi-

libria, and kinetics combined to infer the physi-
cal conditions of igneous rock crystallization
and magma production. Uses results of ex-
perimental studies to constrain processes that
control magma genesis and give rise to the
diversity of igneous rocks. Discusses theoreti-
cal approaches to thermometry-barometry
techniques involving solid/solid and mineral/iq-
uid reactions, kinetic controls on crystallization,
and properties of silicate melts.

T. L. Grove

12.481 Advanced Field Geology |

Prereq.: 12.108, 12.113, 12.114, 12.115
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

2-2-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Introduction to the problems to be investigated
in 12.482, as well as the regional setting and
local geology of the field area. Various special
techniques may be introduced and preparatory
investigations may be conducted that are
specific to the area to be studied in 12.482.

B. C. Burchfiel, J. P. Grotzinger, K. V. Hodges,
L. H. Royden

12.482 Advanced Field Geology Ii

Prereq.: 12.481

Acad Year 1996-97: G (IAP, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

In January, a geological study of a selected
field area is conducted during a four-week ex-
cursion. The following term includes 1)
preparation of maps and report based on field
study conducted in January, and 2) laboratory
analysis of samples.

B. C. Burchfiel, J. P. Grotzinger, K. V. Hodges,
L. H. Royden

12.484 Directed Field Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (IAP)

0-6-0

Can be repeated for credit

Intensive training in field geological methods.
Includes specific exercises selected to comple-
ment the backgrounds of the students enrolled
and provides supervised experience in apply-
ing field analytical techniques to geological
problems. Cannot be taken as a substitute for
12.115.

K. V. Hodges, B. C. Burchfiel

12.485 Advanced Directed Field Studies

Prereq.: 12.484

G (IAP)

0-6-0

Can be repeated for credit

Continuation of 12.484. Designed to provide
more advanced training in specific field geologi-
cal methods. Can be taken during the same
IAP period as 12.484.

K. V. Hodges, B. C. Burchfiel

12.490-12.491 Advanced Seminar in
Geology and Geochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Problems of current interest in geology and
geochemistry. Subject matter varies from term
to term. 12.490 is letter-graded.

Geology and Geochemistry Staff

Descriptions of Subjects 411


--- 04.pdf Page 15 ---
School of Science

Geophysics

12.501 Essentials of Geophysics

(Subject meets with 12.201)
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Overview of basic topics in solid-earth
geophysics, such as the Earth’s rotation,
precessions and wobble, gravity and magnetic
fields, seismology, and thermal structure. For-
mulation of physical principles presented in
three 1-hour lectures per week. Current ap-
plications discussed in an additional 1-hour
tutorial each week.

R. D. van der Hilst

12.507 Environmental Geophysics
(New)

(Subject meets with 12.214)

Prereq.: 18.03

G (Spring)

3-3-6

Introduction to basic geophysical methods that

can be used for environmental site charac-
terization and shallow geological investiga-
tions. Techniques include seismic, electrical,
and electromagnetic sounding; ground-
penetrating radar, magnetics, gravity, and
borehole geophysics. Lectures emphasize
basic principles and a physical understanding
of the geophysical methods with environmen-
tal applications in mind. Some specific case
histories are included. A few weekends of field
measurements at representative local sites are
included. A weekly lab session covers model-
ing and interpretation of geophysical field data.
F. D. Morgan

12.509 Earthquakes and Faulting

Prereq.: 12.005, 18.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Multidisciplinary introduction to the principles

of fault and earthquake mechanics. Overview
of brittle fracture, macroscopic failure criteria,
effective stress laws, friction laws. Fault
mechanics. Fault development and the state of
stress, fault nucleation, and growth. Fault
rocks and structures, the strength and rheol-
ogy of faults. Seismotectonics. Introduction to
the physics of earthquake rupture. Instability
conditions, dynamic energy balance, quantifica-
tion of earthquakes, earthquake source
parameters and scaling laws. The seismic
cycle, earthquake prediction.

C. J. Marone

12.510 Elements of Seismology
Prereq.: 18.075 or 18.085

G (Fall)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A basic subject in seismology and the utiliza-

tion of seismic waves for the study of the
Earth's interior. Introduces techniques neces-
sary for understanding of elastic wave
propagation in layered media. Seismic-ray
theory and interpretation of travel times. Sur-
face-wave dispersion and layered media. Seis-
micity, earthquake magnitude, moment, and
source properties.

M. N. Tokséz

12.511 Low-Frequency Seismology

Prereq.: 8.033, 18.076

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seismological theory and methods based on

the representation of the displacement field as
a superposition of normal modes. Equations of
motion; Rayleigh’s Principle; perturbation
theory; attenuation. Excitation formulae; the in-
verse problem of source structure. Traveling-
wave representation; asymptotic expansions;
surface and body waves. Free oscillations of a
rotating, laterally heterogeneous earth; the in-
verse problem for 3-D Earth structure.

T. H. Jordan

12.512 High-Frequency Seismology

Prereq.: 8.033, 18.076

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seismological theory and methods based on

high-frequency approximations to transient dis-
placement fields. Elastodynamic equations;
representation theorems; moment-tensor rep-
resentation; radiation patterns. Propagator and
reflectivity methods; WKBJ and Langer ap-
proximations. Ray theory; Fermat's Principle;
travel-time curves for spherically symmetric
media. Radon transforms; inversion of travel
times for Earth structure; seismic tomography.
T. H. Jordan

12.515 Data Analysis: Model Parameter
Estimation

Prereq.: 18.075 or 18.085
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys a number of methods of inverting data

to obtain model parameter estimates. Topics
include review of matrix theory and statistics,
random and grid-search methods, linear and
non-linear least squares, maximum-likelihood
estimation, ridge regression, stochastic inver-
sion, sequential estimation, singular value
decomposition, solution of large systems,
genetic and simulated annealing inversion,
regularization, parameter error estimates, solu-
tion uniqueness and resolution. Students are
required to develop the appropriate algorithms
on the computer.

F. D. Morgan

12.517 Dynamics of Complex Physical
Systems

Prereq.: 18.03, 8.02
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to theoretical studies of natural
systems of many interacting components, the
individual dynamics of which may be simple,
but the collective dynamics of which are com-
plex. Topics include scaling, fractals, percola-
tion theory, surface growth, cellular automata.
Methods for obtaining macroscopic dynamics
from microscopic interactions. Applications to
problems of geological/geophysical interest: in-
terfacial and other complex flows, geomorphol-
ogy and other aspects of natural pattern
formation, dynamical aspects of rock physics.
D. H. Rothman

12.518J Sonar, Radar and Seismic Signal
Processing |

(Same subject as 13.741J, 6.455J)

Prereq.: 2.02 or 2.003 or 6.003, 6.041, 18.075
or 18.085

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.741J.
A. B. Baggeroer, J. R. Fricke

12.519J Sonar, Radar and Seismic Signal
Processing Il

(Same subject as 13.742J, 6.456J)
Prereq.: 13.741J

G (Spring)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 13.742.
A. B. Baggeroer, J. R. Fricke

12.520 Geodynamics

Prereq.: 12.005; 18.075 or 18.085
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mechanics of deformation of the crust and
mantle, with emphasis on the importance of dif-
ferent rheological descriptions. Coupling be-
tween mantle convection and crustal
deformation.

B. H. Hager

12.522 Geological Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 8.03; 18.076 or 18.085
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Treats heat transfer and fluid mechanics in the
Earth. Low Reynolds number flows, convec-
tion instability, and double diffusion. Non-New-
tonian flows, flow in porous media, and the
interaction of flows with accreting and deform-
ing boundaries. Applications include the flow
under plates, postglacial rebound, diapirism,
and the mantle convection problem.

(Woods Hole Staff): J. A. Whitehead

412 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 16 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

12.524 Mechanical Properties of Rocks

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A survey of the mechanical behavior of rocks

in natural geologic situations. Topics: brief sur-
vey of field evidence of rock deformation,
physics of plastic deformation in minerals, brit-
tle fracture and sliding, and pressure-solution
processes. Results of field petrologic and struc-
tural studies compared to data from experimen-
tal structural geology.

B. Evans

12.533 Rock Physics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of experimental and theoretical
rock physics taught at an advanced level.
Rocks viewed as complex composite media
with behavior dependent both on the physical
and chemical properties of the constituent
phases, and on their gecmetries. Electrical,
fluid transport, and seismic properties covered
in detail. Other topics such as magnetic,
mechanical, and thermal responses briefly dis-
cussed. Weekly laboratory.

F. D. Morgan

12.540 Principles of Global Positioning
System

Prereq.: 8.01, 18,02, 18.06

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The principles and applications of the Global
Positioning System (GPS) and other space
geodetic systems, including very-long-baseline
interferometry (VLBI) and satellite laser rang-
ing (SLR). The nature and uses of the course
acquisition (CA), the precise positioning (P)
codes, and the differential carrier phase ob-
servable. Techniques for estimating geodetic
and geophysical quantities from these data.
Other topics include: atmospheric refraction
modeling, effects of Selective Availability (SA),
estimation techniques (including Kalman filter-
ing). Statistical and spectral analysis of data.
T. A. Herring

12.550 Geosystems |
(New)

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03, and permission of instruc-

tor
G (Fall)
3-3-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Modeling of complex systems in all areas of

geoscience, with emphasis on general theoreti-
cal principles and numerical tools for describ-
ing system behaviors. Subject matter
organized into a sequence of teaching
modules, each focusing on a specific geosys-
tem. Lectures introduce key physical and
chemical processes that operate within each
geosystem. Laboratory sessions include the
use of simple table-top and computer-based
models, as well as introductions to advanced
numerical simulations, with a strong focus on
scientific inference through numerical ex-
perimentation.

T. H. Jordan, J. Marotzke

12.551 Geosystems II
(New)

Prereq.: 12.550
G (Spring)
3-3-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of Geosystems | (2 semester se-

quence)
T. H. Jordan, J. Marotzke

12.560-12.561 Special Seminar in
Exploration Geophysics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced seminar focusing on areas of cur-

rent interest in exploration geophysics and
seismology. Taught by visiting lecturers.
12.560 is letter-graded.

Geophysics Staff

12.563 Seminar in Earthquake Source
Physics
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Theoretical models, laboratory data, and seis-

mic observations relevant to earthquake
source physics. Topics include: earthquake
nucleation, dynamic rupture processes, in-
stability criteria and the transition from quasi-
Static to dynamic rupture, the influence of fault
zone rheology on source processes, fracture
mechanics and friction This is a reading semi-
nar. Participants read, discuss, and critically
analyze papers from the literature. Detailed
focus varies from year to year.

C. Marone

12.570—-12.571 Seminar in Geophysics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Problems of current interest in geophysics;
subject matter varying from term to term.
12.570 is letter-graded.

Geophysics Staff

12.580—12.581 Special Problems in
Geophysics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students desiring to perform spe-
cial investigations, special laboratory work, or
special fieldwork in geophysics. 12.580 is let-
ter-graded.

Geophysics Staff

Planetary Science

12.601 Essentials of Planetary Science

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews fundamental physical concepts per-
taining to the study of the solar system, and
highlights recent spacecraft results. Topics in-
clude: meteorites, orbital dynamics, asteroids,
impact craters, surfaces, atmospheres, atmos-
pheric dynamics, interiors, magnetospheres,
rings, comets, formation of the solar system.
T. Dowling

12.602 Asteroids and Small Bodies

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to the study of asteroids and the
ground-based and space-based techniques
used to explore them. Topics include asteroid
orbital properties, surface structure, physical
properties, classifications, as well as their
origin, thermal and collisional evolution, and in-
terrelationships with meteorites and comets.
Subject also covers the near-earth asteroids,
the probabilities and consequences of ter-
restrial collisions, and the possible utilization of
asteroids as space resources.

R. P. Binzel

Descriptions of Subjects 413


--- 04.pdf Page 17 ---
School of Science

12.603 Solar System Dynamics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Introduction to chaotic behavior in conserva-

tive systems, with examples drawn primarily
from the rotation and orbital dynamics of
planets and satellites. Includes surfaces of sec-
tion, Lyapunov exponents, perturbation theory,
KAM theorem, resonances, onset of chaos,
double pendulum, Henon-Heiles problem,
restricted three-body problem, spin-orbit cou-
pling, orbital resonances, adiabatic invariants,
adiabatic chaos, tidal evolution, capture into
resonance, stability of the solar system.

J. Wisdom

12.611 Advanced Planetary Observations

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (IAP)

0-6-3 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Astronomical observations involving several

techniques are carried out at a major obser-
vatory, with focus on a particular set of objec-
tives that change from year to year. Work
includes 1) critical planning of the observa-
tions, 2) acquiring the data, 3) calibrating the
data, and 4) on-site data reduction.

J. L. Elliot

12.616 Occultation Studies of the Solar
System
(New)

Prereq.: 8.03, 18.03 or 18.034
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic principles underlying the techniques of

occultations by solar system bodies, observed
throughout the electromagnetic spectrum from
spacecraft and Earth-based platforms. The in-
teraction of electromagnetic radiation with
planetary atmospheres and rings. Astrometric
methods used to predict occultations. Physical
models for atmospheres and rings that have
been developed from occultation data.

J. L. Elliot

12.620J Variational Mechanics: A
Computational Approach

(Same subject as 6.946J, 8.351J)
Prereq.: 8.01, 18.03, 6.001 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Classical mechanics in a computational
framework. Lagrangian formulation. Action,
variational principles. Hamilton’s principle. Con-
served quantities. Hamiltonian formulation. Sur-
faces of section. Chaos. Liouville’s theorem
and Poincaré integral invariants. Poincaré-
Birkhoff and KAM theorems. Invariant

curves. Cantori. Nonlinear resonances.
Resonance overlap and transition to chaos.
Properties of chaotic motion. Transport, dif-
fusion, mixing. Symplectic integration.
Adiabatic invariants. Many-dimensional sys-
tems, Amold diffusion. Extensive use of com-
putation to capture methods, for simulation,
and for symbolic analysis.

J. Wisdom, G. J. Sussman

12.650 Current Topics in Planetary
Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

In-depth discussion of current and classic
literature on selected topics in planetary
science. Topics vary from year to year.

J. Wisdom

12.690-12.691 Special Problems in
Planetary Science

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students desiring to perform spe-
cial investigations, special laboratory work, or
special fieldwork in planetary science. 12.690
is letter-graded.

Planetary Science Staff

Geological, Geophysical, and
Chemical Oceanography

12.707 Pre-Pleistocene Paleoceanography
and Paleoclimatology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Climate history of the Earth from the formation
of the early atmosphere and ocean to the
present. Evaluation of geochemical, sedimen-
tological, and paleontological evidence for
changes in ocean circulation, global tempera-
tures, and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.
Theories and models of Phanerozoic climate
change. Long-term history of the global carbon
cycle.

M. E. Raymo

12.708 Special Topics in Paleoceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Advanced seminar focusing on areas of cur-
rent interest in paleoceanography and
paleoclimatology. Includes discussion of cur-
rent and classic literature. Topics vary from
year to year.

M. E. Raymo

12.710 Marine Geology and Geophysics |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to marine geology and
geophysics intended as part of a two-semester
sequence for first-year MIT-WHOI Joint Pro-
gram students in marine geology and
geophysics. Topics covered include the theory
of plate tectonics, processes of deep-sea
sedimentation, paleoceanography, and the
evolution of the Mesozoic-Cenozoic global
oceans.

R. Detrick, M. Raymo, G. Giese, R. Stephen

12.711 Marine Geology and Geophysics II

Prereq.: 12.710
G (Spring)
3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to marine geology and
geophysics intended as part of a two-semester
sequence for first-year MIT-WHOI Joint Pro-
gram students in marine geology and
geophysics. Topics covered this semester in-
clude lithosphere evolution and mantle
dynamics, the structure and composition of the
oceanic crust and mantle, tectonic and mag-
matic processes at mid-ocean ridges, hotspot
volcanism, subduction and arc magmatism,
and the crustal structure and sedimentation
history of continental margins.

R. Detrick, N. Shimizu, R. Stephen

12.712 Advanced Marine Seismology

Prereq.: 12.711

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced subject on theory and practice of
marine seismology. Topics: seismic wave
propagation; marine reflection and refraction
seismology, including seismic data processing,
modeling, and inversion of multichannel data.
Extensive readings of geophysical literature.
(Woods Hole Staff): R. Stephen, R. Detrick

414 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 18 ---
12.714 Computational Data Analysis

Prereq.: 18.03
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to the theory and practice of

analyzing discrete data such as are normally
encountered in geophysics and geology. Em-
phasizes statistical aspects of data interpreta-
tion and the nonparametric discrete-time
approach to spectral analysis. Topics covered
include elements of probability and statistics,
statistical inference, robust and nonparametric
statistics, the method of least squares,
univariate and multivariate spectral analysis,
digital filters, and aspects of multidimensional
data analysis.

A. D. Chave, M. K. McNutt

12.716 Igneous Processes at Oceanic
Margins

Prereq.: 12.710, 12.711, or permission of in-

structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-2-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Quantitative analysis of melting, melt transport,

and igneous crustal accretion at oceanic
spreading centers, rifted continental margins,
and subduction-related arcs, applied to under-
standing variation in composition and volume
of the Earth’s crust in different tectonic environ-
ments. Theoretical methods for calculation of
melt volume and composition, solid-liquid equi-
libria and reaction rates, and liquid density and
viscosity combined with field, petrographic,
geochemical, and computational techniques.
Topics vary from year to year.

(Woods Hole Staff): P. Kelemen

12.718 Kinetics and Mass Transport

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Offers a broad overview of various kinetic and

transport processes in geology, including
volume and grain boundary solid-state dif-
fusion, defects in minerals, rates of mineral
reaction and transformation, crystal nucleation
and growth, advective transport in porous
media and partially molten aggregates, and
percolation theory. Emphasis on processes in
crystalline rocks. Covers theoretical,
phenomenological, and experimental con-
straints, with a consistent application to “real-
world” settings and actual case histories.
(Woods Hole Staff): G. Hirth, S. Hart

12.721 Special Problems in Marine Geology
and Geophysics at Woods Hole

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students desiring to perform spe-

cial investigations, special laboratory work, or
special fieldwork in marine geology and

geophysics.
(Woods Hole Staff)

Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

12.722 Special Problems in Chemical
Oceanography at Woods Hole

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students desiring to perform spe-

cial investigations, special laboratory work, or
special fieldwork in chemical oceanography.
(Woods Hole Staff)

12.730-12.731 Special Problems in Marine
Geology and Geophysics at MIT

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students in the MIT/WHOI Joint

Program desiring to perform special investiga-
tions, special laboratory work, or special
fieldwork in marine geology and geophysics
under the supervision of a faculty member in
residence at MIT. 12.730 is letter-graded.
Marine Geology and Geophysics Staff

12.735-12.736 Special Problems in
Chemical Oceanography at MIT

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students in the MIT/WHOI Joint

Program desiring to perform special investiga-
tions, special laboratory work, or special
fieldwork in chemical oceanography under the
supervision of a faculty member in residence
at MIT. 12.735 is letter-graded.

Chemical Oceanography Staff

12.740 Quaternary Paleoceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

History of the earth-surface environment
during the past 2 million years as deduced
from the records preserved in deep-sea sedi-
ments, ice cores, and corals. Uses
micropaleontological, isotopic, geochemical,
and mineralogical changes to infer changes in
seawater composition, atmospheric chemistry,
and climate. These changes are used to infer
changes in the temperature and current field of
the ocean. Discussion of processes proposed
to account for glacial/interglacial cycles (orbital
forcing and internal oscillations) and abrupt
century-scale climate changes. Evaluation of
theories of environmental change in view of
the paleoclimatic record of climate change.

E. A. Boyle

12.741 Marine Geochemistry

Prereq.: 5.11 or 3.091; 5.60
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Geochemical cycle of the elements. Continen-
tal weathering processes; oceanic hydrother-
mal systems and fluxes; physical and chemical
processes in the oceanic water column and in
lakes; static versus dynamic models of the
chemistry of the atmosphere and oceans over
geologic time; authigenic sediments and the
control of seawater composition. Emphasizes
development of problems and topics by stu-
dents.

J. M. Edmond

12.742 Marine Chemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to chemical processes operating
in the oceans (i.e., biogeochemical cycles). In-
cludes oceanic particles; cycling of organic
carbon, phosphorous and nitrogen; carbonate
and silica systems; upwelling and low-oxygen
systems; iron and manganese redox systems.
Designed for first- or second-year chemistry,
biology, and geology students.

(Woods Hole Staff): O. Zafiriou, Staff

12.743 Geochemistry of Marine
Sediments

Prereq.: 5.11 or 3.091; 5.60
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Factors influencing the chemical and
mineralogical composition of deep-sea sedi-
ments and chemical fluxes across the sedi-
ment-water interface, and their spatial and
temporal variability. Carbonate, silicic, and
detrital sediments: sources and reactivity. Pore
water: diffusion, reaction, and fluxes. Fer-
romanganese sediments and manganese
nodule geochemistry. Trace element sedimen-
tary geochemistry. Sediment dating and ac-
cumulation rate estimation. Stable isotopes
and natural-series radioisotopes. Effect of
climate change on sedimentary processes.
Mathematical techniques and modeling in
sedimentary systems.

E. A. Boyle

12.744 Marine Isotope Chemistry

Prereq.: 12.742 or 12.741

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Treats important aspects of radionuclides and
stable isotopes as applied to the oceans. In-
cludes introduction to radioactivity, natural-
series radionuclides (i.e., "Pb, *"°Po, Th, U),
artificial radionuclides (i.e., “C, °H, '"Cs, *Sr,
2%.2Pu), and systematics of several stable
isotopes (e.g., Nd, Sr, C, N, O).

(Woods Hole Staff): K. Buesseler, W. Jenkins,
M. Kurz

Descriptions of Subjects 415


--- 04.pdf Page 19 ---
School of Science

12.745 Ore Deposition at Submarine Ridge
Axes

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Ridge crest hot springs; description of current-

ly active systems. Geologic and tectonic set-
ting and exploration strategies. Hydrothermal
chemistry of sediment-starved and sediment-
covered spreading centers and seamounts.
Thermodynamic modeling of water-rock inter-
actions using EQ3/6. Description and clas-
sification of ore deposits formed on the sea
floor. Chemical and physical mechanisms of
ore localization. Formation of metalliferous
sediments.

J. M. Edmond

12.746 Marine Organic Geochemistry

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides an understanding of the distribution

of organic carbon (OC) in marine sediments
from a global and molecular-level perspective.
Surveys the mineralization and preservation of
OC in the water column and within anoxic and
oxic marine sediments. Topics include OC
composition, reactivity and budgets within, and
fluxes through, major reservoirs; microbial recy-
cling pathways for OC; models for OC
degradation and preservation; role of anozia in
OC burial; relationships between dissolved

and particulate (sinking and suspended) OC;
methods for characterization of sedimentary or-
ganic matter; application of biological markers
as tools in oceanography. Both structural and
isotopic aspects are covered.

(Woods Hole Staff): D. Repeta, W. R. Martin

12.747 Modeling, Data Analysis, and
Numerical Techniques for Geochemistry
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasizes the basic skills needed for han-

dling and assimilating data as well as the basic
tool-set for numerical modeling. Uses MATLAB
as its computation engine; begins with an intro-
duction to MATLAB to ensure familiarity with
software. Topics include: probability distribu-
tions, error propagation, least squares and
regression techniques, principle component
and factor analysis, objective mapping, Fourier
and spectral analysis, numerical solutions to
ODEs and PDEs, finite difference techniques,
inverse models, and scientific visualization.
(Woods Hole Staff): D. Glover, W. Jenkins

12.751—12.759 Seminar in Oceanography at
Woods Hole

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics in marine geology and geophysics,

physical, dynamical, and chemical oceanog-
raphy. Content varies from term to term.
12.755 is letter-graded.

(Woods Hole Staff)

12.760-12.761 Seminar in Marine Geology
and Geophysics at MIT

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics in marine geology and geophysics

taught at MIT. Content varies from term to
term. 12.760 is letter-graded.
Marine Geology and Geophysics Staff

12.770-12.771 Seminar in Chemical
Oceanography at MIT

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics in chemical oceanography taught at

MIT. Content varies from term to term. 12.770
is letter-graded.
Chemical Oceanography Staff

Meteorology and Oceanography

12.800 Fluid Dynamics of the Atmosphere
and Ocean

(Subject meets with 12.331)
Prereq.: 8.03, 18.04

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introductory subject for first-year graduate stu-

dents in meteorology and oceanography.
Eulerian and Lagrangian kinematics. Equa-
tions of mass, momentum, and energy in
Eulerian form in rotating frame of reference.
Vorticity and divergence. Scaling and
geostrophic approximation. Potential vorticity.
Rossby waves. Ekman layers. Wave motion
and instability. Vortex motion.

J. Marshall

12.801 Steady Circulation of the Oceans

Prereq.: 12.800
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental principles in modeling steady

flows in the ocean and their analogues in the
atmosphere. Illustrates general methods that
apply to either fluid and the contrasts between
them. Includes quasi-geostrophy on the beta
plane and sphere, Ekman pumping, wind- and
thermally driven ocean circulation models,
western-boundary current dynamics, upwelling
systems.

(Woods Hole Staff): J. Pediosky

12.802 Wave Motions in the Ocean and
Atmosphere

(Subject meets with 12.332)
Prereq.: 12.800 or equivalent
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic ideas of geophysical wave motion in
rotating, stratified, and rotating-stratified fluids,
with a theoretical focus but with coverage of
salient observations. Begins with general wave
concepts, including the dynamics and
kinematics of gravity waves: dispersion, ener-
gy flux, initial value problems, etc. This founda-
tion is then used to study internal and inertial
waves, Kelvin, Poincare, and Rossby waves in
homogeneous and stratified fluids. Laplace
tidal equations are used generically, and ap-
plied to actual tides. Other topics include
resonant interactions, potential vorticity, wave-
mean flow interactions, etc.

C. Wunsch

12.803 Quasi-balanced Circulations in
Oceans and Atmospheres

Prereq.: 12.800, 12.804
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Dynamics of large-scale circulations in oceans
and atmospheres, taken concurrently with the
laboratory subject 12.804. Conservation and
balance principles for large-scale flows;
geostrophic adjustment, potential vorticity and
invertibility; shallow water equations, quasi-
geostrophy; nonlinear balance equations. Dis-
persion and propagation of Rossby waves;
topographic waves. Generation and dissipa-
tion of large-scale eddies, including baroclinic
and barotropic instability as described by
Eady, Charney, and two-layer models; the
Rayleigh, Fjortoft, Charney-Stern, and Arnol’d
theorems; effects of surface friction and phase
change of water; the superposition principle;
quasi-geostrophic turbulence, fronts and fron-
togenesis.

G. Flierl, P. Rizzoli, E. Chang

12.804 Large-scale Flow Dynamics
Laboratory

Prereq.: 12.800, 12.803
G (Fall)
0-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Laboratory component of subject 12.803.
Analysis of observations of oceanic and atmos-
pheric quasi-balanced flows, computational
models, and rotating tank experiments. II-
lustrates the basic principles of potential vor-
ticity conservation and inversion, Rossby wave
propagation, baroclinic instability, and the be-
havior of isolated vortices.

L. Illari, G. Flierl, P. Rizzoli, E. Chang

416 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 20 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

12.805 Laboratory in Physical
Oceanography

Prereq.: 12.808

G (Spring)

2-2-5 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to standard data analysis

methods including time series analysis, objec-
tive mapping, empirical orthogonal functions,
and dynamic analysis of hydrographic data.
Emphasis on working with data in a computer
laboratory setting using packaged software.
Where appropriate, comparison is made with
simple models. Some attention given to the in-
struments and algorithms used to acquire the

data.
(Woods Hole Staff): B. Owens
12.806 Atmospheric Physics and

Chemistry |

Prereq.: 5.61, 18.075
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces atmospheric physics and chemistry.

Transfer of solar and thermal radiation and
radiative heating. Atmospheric thermal struc-
ture, differential heating, and energy budget.
Atmospheric chemistry including kinetics, con-
tinuity, transport, and chemical-radiative-
dynamical feedbacks. Application to ozone
layer and Antarctic ozone hole.

R. G. Prinn, M. J. Molina

12.807 Atmospheric Physics and
Chemistry Il

Prereq.: 12.806
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Radiative transfer including Mie theory scatter-

ing and non-grey effects. Physics of green-
house effect, chemistry of greenhouse gases
and models for warming. Physics and
chemistry of clouds. Chemistry of the tropo-
sphere on urban, regional, and global scales.
Satellite remote sensing and inversion
methods.

M. J. Molina, R. G. Prinn

12.808 Introduction to Observational
Physical Oceanography

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to the results and techniques

of observations of the ocean in the context of
its physical properties and dynamical con-
straints. Emphasis on large-scale steady cir-
culation and the time-dependent processes
that contribute to it. Includes the physical set-
ting of the ocean, atmospheric forcing, applica-
tion of conservation laws, description of
wind-driven and thermohaline circulation, eddy
processes, and interpretive techniques.
(Woods Hole Staff): N. Hogg

12.810 Dynamics of the Atmosphere

Prereq.: 12.800
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Review of equations of motion. Zonally
averaged budgets of heat, momentum, and
water vapor. Review of historical under-
standing of the maintenance of zonal winds.
Symmetric models of the general circulation.
Introduction to waves and eddies in nonrotat-
ing and rotating fluids: specifically internal
gravity waves, tides, Rossby waves, barotropic
and baroclinic instabilities. The interaction of
these asymmetric components of atmospheric
motion with the zonally averaged circulation
discussed. Emphasis on specific observed
phenomena.

R. S. Lindzen

12.811 Tropical Meteorology

(Subject meets with 12.337)
Prereq.: 12.803

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A description of the large-scale circulation sys-

tems of the tropical atmosphere and analysis
of the dynamics of such systems. Topics in-
clude: interaction between the convective
scales and the large-scale flow, importance of
moisture and latent heat release; equatorial
waves; the Hadley circulation; monsoons;
theory of the response of the tropical atmos-
phere to localized sea-surface temperature
anomalies; the Walker circulation;
mechanisms coupling tropics with midiatitudes;
intraseasonal oscillations; El Nifio/Southern
Oscillation; easterly waves; tropical cyclones.
R. A. Plumb

12.812 General Circulation of the Earth’s
Atmosphere

Prereq.: 12.810 or 12.803
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Diagnostic studies and discussion of their im-

plications for the theory of the structure and
general circulation of the Earth’s atmosphere.
Includes some discussion of the validation and
use of general circulation models as atmos-
pheric analogs.

P. H. Stone, R. D. Rosen

12.813 Atmospheric Convection

Prereq.: 12.800

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction and theory of dry convection over

isolated heat sources. Basic theory of Rayleigh
convection. Extensive treatment of the ther-
modynamics of moist and cloudy air. Observa-
tions and dynamics of isolated convective
clouds; turbulence in saturated and partly
saturated mixtures. Moist- and dry-convective
boundary layers. Organization of moist convec-
tion on larger scales and interaction of convec-
tive ensembles with the large-scale
environment.

K. A. Emanuel

12.814 Global Transport Modeling

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The theory and practice of modeling global-
scale transport of trace gases is reviewed,
primarily through reading and discussing the
relevant literature. Taught in two parts: two-
dimensional (longitudinally averaged) models,
mostly but not exclusively concentrating on
models of stratospheric ozone, and three-
dimensional models of tropospheric gases. Em-
phasizes transport rather than chemistry, and
the conceptual basis for and application of
such models, rather than their detailed
numerics.

R. A. Plumb

12.816 Numerical Modeling of the
Atmosphere

Prereq.: 12.803, 12.810

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presentation of the numerical methods used in
atmospheric models: grid point methods, time
differencing schemes, spectral transform
methods, solution to elliptic and parabolic
equations. Hierarchy of numerical prediction
models. Representation of physical processes
in atmospheric models. Objective analysis and
initialization. Discussions on the use of numeri-
cal models in weather and climate prediction.
E. Chang

12.818 Introduction to Atmospheric Data
and Synoptic Meteorology
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 12.338)
Prereq.: 12.800

G (Spring)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides a general introduction to meteorologi-
cal data and analysis techniques, and their
use in the MIT Synoptic Laboratory to study
the phenomenology and dynamics of large-
scale atmospheric flow. Balance concepts as
applied to the dynamics of frontal and synoptic
scales are illustrated using real-time upper air
and surface station data and gridded analyzed
fields. Advanced meteorological software pack-
ages are used to access, manipulate, and
graphically display the data. Statistical
methods such as optimal interpolation, EOF,
and time series analyses are discussed.

L. Mari, E. Chang

Descriptions of Subjects 417


--- 04.pdf Page 21 ---
School of Science

12.820 Instability and Turbulence in
Geophysical Systems

Prereq.: 12.803

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Comprehensive introduction to the methodol-

ogy of stability theory as applied to problems
of interest in geophysical fluid dynamics. Em-
phasizes problems governed by quasi-
geostrophic dynamics. Topics in linear theory
include baroclinic-barotropic instability, numeri-
cal methods for eigenvalue problems, Rossby
wave instability, symmetric instability, and solu-
tion of initial-value problems. Nonlinear in-
stability.

(Woods Hole Staff): L. Pratt, K. Helfrich

12.822 Nonlinear Waves and Vortices

Prereq.: 18.305, 12.803

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The dynamics of nonlinear waves in geophysi-

cal systems. Linear dispersion, nonlinear
steepening, and solitary waves. Wave groups.
Modulational instability. Particle motions in
waves. Point vortices, vortex patches, and
modons. Interactions between vortices and
wave fields. Nonlinear instability, bifurcations,
chaotic behavior.

G. Flier!

12.823 Ocean Modeling

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Students engage in hands-on research
directed at a central problem of contemporary
physical oceanography by using numerical
models that they build themselves. Meets at a
weekly workshop where progress is reviewed
and priorities for the next week are set out.
Outstanding issues of the chosen problem are
reviewed and the theory and models required
to understand them developed. Formal lec-
tures are kept to a minimum; the chosen
theme varies from year to year.

J. Marshall

12.826) Land-Atmosphere Interaction

(Same subject as 1.713J)

Prereq.: 1.71J or 1.714 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.713J.
D. Entekhabi

12.830 Topics in Waves and Instability

Prereq.: 12.803; 12.802 or 12.810
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A detailed presentation of selected advanced

topics in waves and instability in the atmos-
phere. The precise selection varies from year
to year. Topics have included wave-mean flow
interaction, the quasi-biennial oscillation, sud-
den warmings, critical-level behavior, wave
overreflection, nonlinear equilibration, wave

breaking, tropical waves, and stationary waves.

R. S. Lindzen

12.831 Dynamics of the Middle
Atmosphere

Prereq.: 12.810 or permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Observed characteristics of the stratosphere

and mesosphere. Climatological heat budget.
Wave transport theory. Tides. Gravity waves.
Gravity wave breaking. Traveling planetary
waves. Quasi-stationary ultralong waves;
propagation in winter and impact on the mean
circulation. Potential vorticity diagnostics; wave
breaking. Dynamics of the disturbed polar vor-
tex; “warmings.” Equatorial waves in the strato-
sphere. Theory of the quasi-biennial
oscillation. Transport of trace constituents.
Ozone: observed climatology; production and
loss processes; effects of transport. Ozone
depletion.

R. A. Plumb

12.840 Past and Present Climate

(Subject meets with 12.301)
Prereq.: 8.02

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Properties of climate systems. Physics of

climatic fluctuations on time scales from past
century up to 100 million years. Phenomena of
drought, biennial oscillation, Southern Oscilla-
tion and El Nifio, and other interannual fluctua-
tions. Review of evidence for global warming
and possible temperature limits. Role of vol-
canoes, water vapor, ozone, and carbon
dioxide changes, solar variations, and surface
changes in altering climate. Reconstruction of
ice-age climate from ocean-bed cores, pollen
records, isotope ratios in ice cores. Theories of
ice ages. Large-scale ocean-atmosphere inter-
actions. Suitable for undergraduate students
with little or no previous background in
meteorology. Meets with undergraduate sub-
ject 12.301, but assignments differ.

R. E. Newell

12.841 Climate Modeling

Prereq.: 12.801, 12.803 or 12.810
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops parameterizations for atmospheric
and oceanic processes important in determin-
ing climate and applies them in simple models
of climate and climate change. Discussion of
General Circulation Model studies of climate
and climate change.

P. H. Stone, J. Marotzke

12.862 Dynamics of Shelf Circulation |

Prereq.: 12.800
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General introduction to the dynamics of flow
over the continental shelf. An overview of sur-
face and bottom boundary layer physics.
Theory and observations of tides over the con-
tinental shelf.

(Woods Hole Staff): R. Beardsley,

J. Trowbridge

12.863 Dynamics of Shelf Circulation Il

Prereq.: 12.862 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

More specialized topics in the dynamics of flow
over the continental shelf, including coastal-
trapped waves, wind-driving, and mean flows.
Emphasis on the relationship between theory
and observations. Instrumentation and the ap-
plication of statistical techniques also covered.
(Woods Hole Staff): D. Chapman

12.864 Ocean Data and Ocean Models |

Prereq.: 18.075 or 18.086

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

12.865 Ocean Data and Ocean Models I!

Prereq.: 12.864

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental methods used for exploring the
information content of observations related to
theoretical ideas about how the ocean moves.
Basic statistics and linear algebra for inverse
and assimilation methods including singular
value decompositions, control theory, sequen-
tial estimation (Kalman filters.and smoothing al-
gorithms), adjoint/Pontryagin principle
methods, etc. Second part focuses on station-
ary processes, including Fourier methods, z-
transforms, sampling theorems, spectra,
coherences, filtering, etc. Directed at the quan-
titative combinations of models, with realistic,
i.e. sparse and noisy observations

C. |. Wunsch

418 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 22 ---
Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary Sciences Course 12

{2.866 Theory of the General Circulation of
the Ocean

Prereq.: 12.800, 12.801, 12.802
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A review of wind-driven, homogeneous, ocean
circulation theory. Quasi-geostrophic layer
models of the circulation. Open and closed
geostrophic contours. Potential vorticity
homogenization. The ventilated thermocline.
Combined ventilated and homogenized circula-
tions. Inter-gyre communication. Buoyancy-
forced circulation. Inertial models of the
equatorial undercurrent. Stommel-Arons

theory for the abyssal circulation. Effects of

topography.
(Woods Hole Staff): J. Pedlosky

12.870 Air-Sea Interaction: Boundary Layers

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-1-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the interaction of the atmosphere
and ocean on time scales from hours to
months, with emphasis on effects within the
boundary layers. Methods for measuring and
computing air/sea fluxes are reviewed, and stu-
dents who participate in the optional laboratory
subject at WHOI can build and use the

relevant instruments. Modification of boundary
layers by air/sea exchange, radiation and tur-
bulent mixing is treated using a hierarchy of
boundary layer models that are available on
Athena for student use.

(Woods Hole Staff): J. Price, J. Edson

12.950-12.951 Seminar in Physical
Oceanography at MIT

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics in physical and dynamical oceanog-
raphy. Content varying from term to term.

12.960-12.961 Special Problems in
Physical Oceanography at MIT

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Special investigations, special laboratory work,

or special fieldwork in oceanography. 12.960 is
letter-graded.

Physical Oceanography Staff

12.970-12.971 Special Problems in Physical
Oceanography at Woods Hole

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Reading, consultation, and original investiga-
tion on oceanographic problems. 12.970 is let-
ter-graded.

(Woods Hole Staff)

12.980-12.981 Special Problems in
Meteorology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Reading, consultation, and original investiga-
tions on meteorological problems. 12.980 is let-
ter-graded.

Meteorology Staff

12.990-12.991 Special Subjects in
Meteorology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Organized lecture or laboratory subject on
some aspect of meteorology not normally
covered in regularly scheduled subjects.
12.990 is letter-graded.

Consult Department Headquarters.

Descriptions of Subjects 419


--- 04.pdf Page 23 ---
School of Engineering

Course 13

Ocean Engineering

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.

13.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Research in engineering for the ocean environ-

ment, including naval architecture, wave ener-
gy, seakeeping, ocean exploration, ocean
transportation, ocean vehicles, utilization of
resources, marine economics, systems
analysis, marine policy, marine
hydrodynamics, ocean acoustics, ocean struc-
tures, sailing yachts, and some aspects of
marine-related management. Hands-on ex-
perimental research in modern laboratory
facilities.

D.K.-P. Yue

13.010 Introduction to Ocean Science and
Technology

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST

Introductory subject for students majoring or

minoring in ocean engineering and others
desiring introductory knowledge in the field.
Physical oceanography including distributions
of salinity, temperature, and density; heat
balance; major ocean circulations and
geostrophic flows; and influence of wind
stress. Surface waves including wave
velocities, propagation phenomena, and
descriptions of real sea waves. Acoustics in
the ocean including influence of water proper-
ties on sound speed and refraction, sounds
generated by ships and marine animals, fun-
damentals of sonar, types of sonar systems
and their principles of operation.

T. F. Ogilvie

13.012 Fluid Mechanics for Ocean
Engineers

Prereq.: 13.010, 18.03

U (Spring)

4-3-8

Development of the fundamental equations of

fluid mechanics and their simplifications for
several areas of marine hydrodynamics. Ap-
plication of these equations to a wide variety of
problems of interest to ocean engineers rang-
ing from local boundary layer flows on a small
underwater vehicle to global oceanic flows;
ocean tides. Hydrostatic behavior of floating
and submerged bodies, lift and drag forces,
water waves and wave forces on ships and
platforms.

T. F. Ogilvie

420 Chapter Vill

13.013J Systems Modeling and Dynamics Il

(Same subject as 2.004J, 2.03J)
Prereq.: 2.001 and 2.003 or 13.015

U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-5

See description under subject 2.004J.
J. H. Williams, Jr., J. K. Vandiver

13.014 Marine Structures and Materials

Prereq.: 2.001, 18.03
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Fundamentals of solid mechanics and
materials science needed for design and
fabrication of marine structures. Topics related
to solid mechanics include advanced beam
theory, beam buckling, plastic beam response,
and structural failure. Topics related to
materials science include atomic structures of
materials, phase diagrams, mechanical proper-
ties, cutting and joining techniques.

K. Masubuchi, H. Schmidt

13.015 Mathematical Methods in Ocean
Engineering

Prereq.: 18.03
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Mathematical methods are developed for the

solution of physical problems arising in ocean
engineering. Model problems from
hydrodynamics, wave propagation, vibrations,
structural mechanics, and signal processing
are formulated and solved using the theory of
ordinary differential equations, complex vari-
ables and complex contour integration,
Laplace and Fourier transforms, convolution,

impulse response functions, and Fourier series.

P. D. Sclavounos

13.016 Introduction to Geometric Modeling
and Computation

Prereq.: 8.01, 18.02
U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST

Development of mathematical representations
of curves and surfaces for use in computer-
aided design and engineering analysis, from
simple polynomials to general non-uniform ra-
tional B-splines. Numerical integration and dif-
ferentiation. Software engineering concepts.
Code design, development, debugging and
maintenance. Fortran 77 syntax, data types,
subroutines. Emphasis on engineering modell-
ing and design in computational environment.
Homework projects developed around ocean
engineering applications include writing
Fortran 77 programs and using software
developed under Project Athena.

J. E. Kerwin

13.017 Design of Ocean Systems |

Prereq.: 2.001, 6.071, 13.016, 13.072
U (Spring)
3-4-5 Institute LAB

13.018 Design of Ocean Systems II

Prereq.: 13.017
U (Fall)
1-4-7 Institute LAB

A two-semester subject sequence that
demonstrates the design process through ap-
plication to small-scale ocean systems. Em-
phasis on carrying out the design and
implementation of a system, including
demonstration of its operation in the marine en-
vironment. Fall Term: Introduction to the
design process and its application in the
marine environment. Design project with stu-
dents developing system definition and com-
pleting its preliminary design. Students are
instructed in the use of the machine shop and
are required to implement mechanical, electri-
cal, and electronic components of the sys-
tems. Spring Term: Students work in small
groups to design and implement system
defined in 13.017, including demonstration of
its operation in the laboratory or marine en-
vironment. Students design, plan, construct,
and operate a small-scale ocean system, or
plan, develop experimental apparatus, acquire
data, and report the analysis of an experiment
in the ocean or the laboratory. Subject varies
from year to year. The specific topic is made
available to students during IAP before the first
term of the subject sequence. Each of these
subjects satisfies six units of the General In-
stitute Laboratory Requirement.

M. S. Triantafyllou


--- 04.pdf Page 24 ---
Department of Ocean Engineering Course 13

13.020 Introduction to Fluid Mechanics for
Naval Architecture

Prereq.: 18.089
G (Summer)
3-0-5

Kinematics and dynamics of fluid motion; ap-

plications to water waves, lifting surfaces,
boundary layers; dimensional analysis and
model testing.

T. F. Ogilvie

13.021 Marine Hydrodynamics |
Prereq.: 13.012 or 2.20 or 1.05

G (Fall)

4-1-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The fundamentals of fluid mechanics are

developed in the context of naval architecture
and ocean science and engineering. Transport
theorem and conservation principles. Navier-
Stokes’ equation. Dimensional analysis. Ideal
and potential flows. Vorticity and Kelvin’s
theorem. Hydrodynamic forces in potential
flow, D’Alembert’s paradox, added-mass,
slender-body theory. Viscous-fluid flow,
laminar and turbulent boundary layers. Model
testing, scaling laws. Application of potential
theory to surface waves, energy transport,
wave/body forces. Linearized theory of lifting
surfaces. Experimental project in the towing
tank or propeller tunnel.

D. K.-P. Yue

13.022 Marine Hydrodynamics II
Prereq.: 13.021, 18.075

G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of 13.021, emphasizing analytical

and computational methods. Ideal flows in two
and three dimensions. Lifting-surface theory
for steady, unsteady, and cavitating hydrofoils.
Water waves, loads and motions of bodies in
waves, and ship wave resistance.
Hydrodynamics of slender bodies, maneuver-
ing, strip theory of ship motions. Use of panel
programs for computations.

J. N. Newman

13.03 Responses of Marine Structures to
Sea Loads

Prereq.: 18.075, 13.022
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Hydrodynamic and statistical models describ-

ing the responses of marine structures in ran-
dom seas. Linear wave-body interactions.
Nonlinear wave loads on ships, semisubmer-
sibles, and tension-leg platforms. Effects of
wind and current. Linear response statistics.
Gaussian and Rayleigh processes. Extreme
Statistics. Stochastic models for nonlinear
responses. Markovian processes and Volterra
Series. Nonstationary and memory
effects. Case studies include the slamming of
ships and slow-drift oscillation of compliant
structures.

P. D. Sclavounos

13.04 Hydrofoils and Propellers

Prereq.: 18.076, 13.021
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and design of hydrofoil sections; lifting

and thickness problems for sub-cavitating sec-
tions, unsteady flow problems. Computer-
aided design of low drag, cavitation free
sections. Lifting line and lifting surface theory
with applications to hydrofoil craft, rudder, and
control surface design. Propeller lifting line and
lifting surface theory; computer-aided design
of wake adapted propellers, unsteady
propeller thrust and torque. Flow about axially
symmetric bodies and low-aspect ratio lifting
surfaces. Experimental projects in the variable
pressure water tunnel.

J. E. Kerwin

13.06 Numerical Methods in Marine
Hydrodynamics

Prereq.: 13.021, 13.50, 18.075
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Formulation, methodology, and techniques of

numerical solutions of problems in marine
hydrodynamics. Rudiments of finite-difference,
finite-element, boundary-integral-equation, and
spectral methods with illustrations of applica-
tions to this field. Special emphases on treat-
ment of free-surface and open boundaries,
and the characteristics and efficacy of the dif-
ferent approaches. Projects involve hands-on
development of simple computer programs.

D. K.-P. Yue

13.07 Free Surface Hydrodynamics

Prereq.: 13.022, 18.076

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Water wave phenomena pertinent to problems

in naval architecture and ocean engineering.
Generation, propagation, and diffraction of
plane progressive waves. Exciting and restor-
ing forces on floating and submerged bodies.
Ship waves and wave resistance. Use of panel
methods to compute wave forces on ships and
offshore platforms. Some background in water
waves equivalent to that covered in 13.022 as-
sumed. Alternates with 13.09.

J. N. Newman

13.09 Potential Flows

Prereq.: 13.022, 18.076

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops and applies potential theory to the
flow past marine vehicles. Review of ideal fluid
theory. Simple potential flows. Two-dimen-
sional flows based on complex variable theory.
Three-dimensional flows based on separation
of variables and Green's theorem.
Hydrodynamic pressure forces and the added-
mass tensor. Description of numerical
methods, matched asymptotic expansions,
and slender-body theory. Alternates with
13.07. Second half of subject includes mini-
seminars by students on relevant research
topics.

J. N. Newman

13.10J Introduction to Structural Mechanics

(Same subject as 1.573)
Prereq.: 2.001, 18.03

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental concepts of structural mechanics
with applications to marine and civil structures.
Governing equations of continuum mechanics.
Analysis of beams, columns, and shafts. Exact
and approximate methods for analysis of stati-
cally indeterminate structures, energy
methods, principle of virtual work. Elastic buck-
ling of columns. Examples from trusses, build-
ings, ships, and cables.

N. M. Patrikalakis, J. J. Connor, Jr.

13.111 Structural Mechanics

Prereq.: 13.10J or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concept of deformation and equilibrium in con-
tinuum mechanics and plate and shell struc-
tures. Derivation of elastic stress-strain
relations for plate and shell elements. Bending
and buckling of rectangular plates. Nonlinear
geometric effects. Post-buckling and ultimate
strength of typical stiffened panels used in
naval architecture. General theory of elastic
shells and axisymmetric shells. Buckling and
crushing strength of cylindrical shells.

T. Wierzbicki

13.112 Safety of Marine Systems

Prereq.: 13.014 or 13.410, 13.111, 13.42
G (Spring)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Marine safety regulation with historical
perspective. Ship grounding and collision in-
cluding damage case studies, methods for
protection, and residual strength of damaged
ships. Extreme wave loads, slamming, and ice
damage. Statistical analysis of ship intact
stability, subdivision, and damaged stability.
Decision-making methods necessary to con-
sider engineering, maintenance, and operation-
al alternatives affecting environmental impact
of tanker oil spills. Capstone for Marine Safety
concentration, Program in Marine Environmen-
tal Systems.

A. J. Brown, T. Wierzbicki

Descriptions of Subjects 421


--- 04.pdf Page 25 ---
School of Engineering

13.122 Ship Structural Analysis and
Design

Prereq.: 13.111, 13.14J or 13.410

G (Spring)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Ship longitudinal strength and hull primary

stresses. Ship structural design concepts. Ef-
fect of superstructures and dissimilar materials
on primary strength. Transverse shear stres-
ses and thermal stresses in the hull girder. Tor-
sional strength of ships. Design limit states
including plate bending, column and panel
buckling, panel ultimate strength, and plastic
analysis. Matrix stiffness, grillage, and finite
element analysis. Computer projects on the
structural design of a midship module.

A. J. Brown

13.14J Structural Mechanics in Nuclear
Power Technology

(Same subject as 22.314J, 1.56J, 2.084J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.314J.
O. Buyukozturk, J. E. Meyer

13.15 Materials for Ocean Engineering

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-8

Properties of metals used for the construction

of ships and ocean engineering structures.
Microstructures, processing, heat treatment,
service behavior, and failures with special em-
phasis on corrosion resistance of ferrous and
nonferrous metals.

K. Masubuchi

13.16J Fracture of Structural Materials

(Same subject as 3.90J, 1.591J)
Prereq.: 2.30 or 3.11 or 13.15

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 3.90J.
K. Masubuchi, F. J. McGarry

13.21 Ship Power and Propulsion
Prereq.: 2.40

G (Fall)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines ship power and propulsion systems

for commercial and naval ships. Considers
steam, diesel, and gas-turbine power plants,
together with speed reducers and propulsors.
Project study and economic evaluation of the
propulsion system for a commercial or a naval
ship.

A. D. Carmichael

13.25J Thermal Power Engineering

(Same subject as 2.41J)
Prereq.: 2.005

U (Spring)

3-0-9

See description under subject 2.41J.
A. D. Carmichael, E. G. Cravalho

13.26J Design of Thermal Power
Systems

(Same subject as 2.601J)
Prereq.: 2.005, 2.006, 2.51
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.601J.
A. D. Carmichael, L. R. Glicksman

13.39 Analysis of Techniques for
Fabricating Structures

Prereq.: 3.13 or 13.15
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes problems related to fabrication of

structures, such as ships, aircraft, rockets,
pressure vessels, buildings, and ocean en-
gineering structures by various joining proc-
esses including welding, riveting, and adhesive
bonding. Discusses problem areas such as
fracture characteristics of welded structures;
residual stress, distortion, and stress relieving;
advanced welding metallurgy; nondestructive
testing of structural welds. Laboratory
demonstrations of some tests.

K. Masubuchi

13.410 Introduction to Naval Architecture

Prereq.: —
G (Summer)
3-0-9

Introduction to principles of naval architecture,

ship geometry, hydrostatics, calculation and
drawing of displacement and other curves, in-
tact and damaged stability, hull structure
strength calculations, and ship resistance.
Projects include computer-aided ship design
and analysis tools.

M. Welsh

13.411 Methods of Naval Ship-System
Design

Prereq.: 13.410
G (Summer)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Overview of naval ship design and acquisition

process; mechanics of designing a ship sys-
tem, formulation of a systematic design plan,
requirements and constraints, design
philosophy and design elements; selection/op-
timization criteria; design trade-offs; analysis of
ship design trends; marginal cost factors.
Design exercises and projects in application of
principles.

A. J. Brown

13.412 Principles of Naval Ship Design

Prereq.: 13.410; 13.21; 13.021; 13.411;
13.122; 13.49

G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Design of surface ship platforms for naval ap-
plications; formal design optimization proce-
dures; mathematical and computer models of
ship design process; engineering and
economic principles governing selection of
dimensions and coefficients; influence of hull
form and dimensions on seakeeping and
maneuvering in calm water and rough seas; in-
ternal subdivisions for efficient arrangement
and maximum survivability; damage stability.
Design exercises in applications of principles.
A. J. Brown, M. Welsh

13.413 Projects in Naval Ships Conversion
Design

Prereq.: 13.411, 13.412, 13.21

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Project studies focus on conversion design of
a naval ship. A new mission requirement is
defined, requiring significant ship modification.
Design plan formulation. Technical aspects ad-
dressed in sufficient detail to demonstrate
feasibility and desirability. Requires formal writ-
ten and verbal reports. Encourages participa-
tion by several students in a single project.

A. J. Brown, M. Welsh

13.414 Projects in New Construction Naval
Ship Design

Prereg.: 13.411, 13.412, 13.21 and 13.413
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Project studies focus on preliminary design of
a new naval ship, fulfilling a given set of mis-
sion requirements. Design plan formulation.
System level trade-off studies. Emphasizes
achieving a balanced design and total system
integration. Requires formal written and oral
reports. Encourages participation by several
students in a single project extending over two
terms.

A. J. Brown, M. Welsh

13.42 Design Principles for Ocean
Vehicles

Prereq.: 13.014; 13.021; 13.013)
G (Spring) '
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Linear systems and random processes; ocean
spectra and their selection; short-term and
long-term statistics. Inertia vs drag dominated
flows; seakeeping and sensitivity of seakeep-
ing performance. Maneuvering of surface and
underwater vehicles; equations of motion; mo-
tion stability; control surfaces. Design exer-
cises in application of principles.

M. S. Triantafyllou, M. Grosenbaugh

422 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 26 ---
Department of Ocean Engineering Course 13

13.43 Design of Ocean Engineering
Systems

Prereq.: 13.42
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced topics in designing ocean engineer-

ing systems. Wave, current, and wind forces;
statistics of drift forces. Separation, oscillatory
flow around bluff bodies. Vortex-induced vibra-
tions. Galloping and flutter. Cable statics and
dynamics; dynamics and design of multileg
mooring systems. Riser statics and dynamics;
flexible risers; towed arrays. Dynamic position-
ing of vehicles; modeling issues and control
system design. Applications to floating struc-
tures include moored semisubmersibles and
ships, and tension-leg platforms.

M. S. Triantafyllou, M. Grosenbaugh

13.462 Projects in Ocean Engineering
System Design

Prereq.: 13.412 or 13.42 or 13.43

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Determines design criteria for ocean-based

systems such as ships, submersibles, plat-
forms, and their control systems derived from
a set of system mission requirements specified
by the student in consultation with the instruc-
tor. Preparation of preliminary design of sys-
tem fulfilling selected criteria. Students
intending to take 13.462 should plan a two-
term sequence, preferably beginning in the
first term. Participation by several students in a
single project encouraged. Primarily for
graduate students in Ocean Engineering;
others admitted by permission of instructor.

C. Chryssostomidis, M. S. Triantafyllou

13.465 Ocean Instrument Field Laboratory

Prereq.: 13.951
G (IAP)
1-4-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Field experience subject at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution. Classroom back-
ground and field laboratory with hands-on ex-
perience. Emphasis on moder oceanographic
instrumentation including the operation of side-
scan sonar, conductivity, temperature, depth,
and optical backscatter systems; modern un-
derwater acoustic navigation and tracking tech-
niques; underwater systems for coastal
research and monitoring; and underwater
vehicle operation.

J. H. Milgram, C. von Alt (Woods Hole Staff)

13.470J Computer Aided Engineering |

(Same subject as 1.124J, 2.159J)
Prereq.: 1.00 and knowledge of C
G (Fall)

3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.124J.
J. R. Williams

13.471J Design and Implementation of
Computer-Aided Engineering Systems
(Same subject as 2.157J, 1.127J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-2-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.157J.
N. M. Patrikalakis, D. C. Gossard

13.472) Computational Geometry

(Same subject as 1.128J, 2.158J)
Prereq.: 13.471J/2.157J or 6.837
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics in surface modeling: b-splines, non-
uniform rational b-splines, physically based
deformable surfaces, sweeps and generalized
cylinders, offsets, blending and filleting sur-
faces. Non-linear solvers and intersection
problems. Solid modeling: constructive solid
geometry, boundary representation, non-
manifold and mixed-dimension boundary repre-
sentation models, octrees. Robustness of
geometric computations. Interval methods.
Finite and boundary element discretization
methods for continuum mechanics problems.
Scientific visualization. Variational geometry.
Tolerances. Inspection methods. Feature rep-
resentation and recognition. Shape interroga-
tion for design, analysis, and manufacturing.
Involves analytical and programming assign-
ments in C.

N. M. Patrikalakis, D. C. Gossard

13.49 Maneuvering and Control of Surface
and Underwater Vehicles

Prereq.: 13.42
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Maneuvering motions of surface and under-
water vehicles. Derivation of equations of mo-
tion, hydrodynamic coefficients. Memory
effects. Linear and nonlinear forms of the equa-
tions of motion. Control surfaces; modeling
and design of control surfaces. Environmental
forces, simulation of a maneuvering vehicle.
Towed vehicles and their motion. Stability of
motion. Principles of multivariable automatic
control; effect of delays. Applications include
autopilots for surface vehicles; towing in open
seas; remotely operated vehicles; and single
point moorings.

M. S. Triantafyllou, M. Grosenbaugh

13.50 Numerical Methods with Applications
to Marine Problems

Prereq.: 18.03, 13.016 or 1.00
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Introduces numerical methods useful in the
solution of engineering problems. Repre-
sentation of numbers on the computer. Round-
off error. Solution of linear systems. Nonlinear
equations. Eigenvalues of dynamical systems.
Singular-value decomposition. Optimization
methods. Fast Fourier Transforms. Differential
equations. Solution of model problems from
ocean engineering by finite-difference, finite-
element, and spectral methods. Assigned com-
puter problems requiring familiarity with
FORTRAN.

P. D. Sclavounos

13.51 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00
U (Spring)
3-1-8

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 999.

F. Pefia-Mora

13.52 Management in Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

J.-H, Chun

13.60 Ship Production
(New)

Prereq.: 13.410, 13.122, 13.17J
G (Summer)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents and applies modern ship production
methods in a total ship system and concurrent
engineering context. Reviews basic fabrication
and material handling processes. Major topics
include design/production integration, build
strategy, group technology zone construction,
shipyard layout, CAD/CAM, accuracy control,
process planning, and scheduling. Examines
design concepts to enhance producibility and
reduce cost/environment impact. Uses case
Studies and projects.

A. J. Brown

Descriptions of Subjects 423


--- 04.pdf Page 27 ---
School of Engineering

13.61 Project Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Review of project and development
economics. Project identification and demand
forecast techniques. Study of project design
and planning methods such as network plan-
ning techniques, technological forecasting and
evaluation methods, capital budgeting and
project control, and scheduling techniques.
Technical, operational, economic, and financial
project analyses reviewed. Methods for selec-
tion from among project alternatives dis-
cussed. Study of procurement or contracting
process. Approaches to project supervision,
test, and acceptance.

E. G. Frankel

13.615J Project Control
(New)

(Same subject as 1.432J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.432J.
F. Pefia-Mora, H. S. Marcus

13.62 Engineering Systems Analysis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
R. de Neutville, J. P. Clark, F. Field

13.621 Engineering Risk-Benefit
Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
G. Apostolakis, A. W. Drake, A. R. Odoni

13.64 Projects in Ocean Systems
Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An applied problem-solving subject where stu-

dents work in multidisciplinary teams to solve
current ocean systems problems. Designed to
train students how to think about large marine
systems, identify problems, formulate and
carry out research plans, perform rigorous
analyses, and seek alternative solutions. Com-
bines analytical skills and knowledge in marine
management, ocean engineering tech-
nologies, and marine sciences. Projects
change yearly, and include topics such as
ocean transport systems, oil and other marine
pollution, dredging and port systems, waste-
water management, and ocean resources
management. Primarily for students in Ocean
Systems Management and Marine Environ-
mental Systems Programs; others admitted by
permission of instructor.

H. S. Marcus, J. T. Kildow, J. D. Nyhart

13.661 Economics of Marine Transportation
and Environment

Prereq.: 14.01 or permission of instructor

G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies the economics of the principal markets

related to marine transportation, environment,
and natural resources. Structures of the
markets and industries involved; competition;
impacts of policies and regulations. Analysis of
the interrelationships among economic in-
frastructures, technologies, and national
policies. Introduces new concepts of national
income accounts, sustainability, and inter-
generational equity and their relationship to
current economic practice. Meets first half of
term.

J. T. Kildow, H. S. Marcus

13.665J Logistical and Transportation
Planning Methods

(Same subject as 1.203J, 6.281J, 11.526J,

15.073J, 16.76J)

Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.203J.
A. |. Barnett, R. C. Larson, A. R. Odoni

13.68 Management of Marine Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes current technological, market, and

regulatory trends in various segments of the
marine industry and government development
programs such as liner trades, vessel charter-
ing, shipbuilding, defense systems, and coas-
tal facilities; description of resources and
constraints involved; impact of trends on
management decisions; analysis of problems
actually existing in the field. Meets during
second half of term.

H. S. Marcus

13.685J Manufacturing/Technology
Interface

(Same subject as 15.365J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.365J.
J. M. Utterback

13.69 International Shipping
Prereq.: 13.68

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores internal operating, financial, and

marketing issues as well as external market
and technological factors that define the inter-
national shipping environment. Includes effect
of world energy prices and changing trade pat-
terns upon demand for shipping; evaluation of
shipping capacity requirements in terms of
Capital needs; new ship and terminal tech-
nologies; and effect of changing international
relationships. Other students admitted by per-
mission of the instructor.

H. S. Marcus

13.690-699 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

13.700—13.709 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Special reading, study, design, and/or inves-
tigation under supervision of a qualified mem-
ber of the staff. Topics in ocean engineering,
naval architecture, or marine engineering in-
dividually arranged to suit interests of the stu-
dent. Consult Department Student
Administration Office for subject number that
will be assigned in accordance with the techni-
cal area of the topic selected.

D. K.-P. Yue

13.710—-13.719 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Special reading, study, design, and/or inves-
tigation under supervision of a member of the
Staff. Topics in ocean engineering, naval ar-
chitecture, or marine engineering individually
arranged to suit interests of the student. Con-
sult Department Student Administration Office
for subject number that will be assigned by the
Department in accordance with the technical
area of the topic selected.

A. D. Carmichael

13.720-729 Special Problems in Ocean
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

13.730-13.739 Seminar in Ocean
Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Weekly lectures on new topics in ocean en-
gineering by members of the MIT staff. Con-
sult Department Student Administration Office
for subject number assigned in accordance
with the technical area of the topic selected.
Consult Department Headquarters.

424 Chapter VIII


--- 04.pdf Page 28 ---
Department of Ocean Engineering Course 13

13.741J Sonar, Radar and Seismic Signal
Processing I

(Same subject as 6.455J, 12.518J)

Prereq.: 2.02 or 2.003 or 6.003, 6.041, 18.075
or 18.085

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Signal processing used in sonar, radar, and
geophysical data analysis. Active sonar and
radar systems: matched filters and ambiguity
functions, signal design of range/doppler
resolution; second moment characterizations
of random processes with correlation functions
and power density spectra, deconvolution,
spectral estimation by Fourier techniques and
adaptive methods, beam forming.

A. B. Baggeroer

13.742J Sonar, Radar and Seismic Signal
Processing Il

(Same subject as 6.456J, 12.519J)
Prereq.: 13.741J

G (Spring)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of 13.741J emphasizing array
processing in sonar, radar, and seismics. Ar-
rays, beamformers and frequency-wave num-
ber filters, space-time process
characterization, bearing estimation for single
and multiple sources, directional and frequen-
cy wavenumber spectra estimation, adaptive
arrays, matched field processing, multichannel
deconvolution, velocity spectra estimation,
common depth point stacking, migration.

A. B. Baggeroer

13.771 Engineering Internship

Prereq.: —
U (Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

13.774 Advanced Engineering Internship

Prereq.: 13.771
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0

Enrollment restricted to students registered in
Course XIlII-C Program. Provides academic
credit for assignments affiliated with XIII-C Pro-
gram. Students register for 13.771 during their
first and second company assignments, ac-
cumulating a total of 12 units. Students
register for 13.774 during their seven-month
company assignment (after admission to
graduate school), accumulating a total of 12
graduate units (six units per term). Credit for
above given upon satisfactory completion of
company assignments, receipt of favorable
evaluation by company supervisor, and receipt
of favorable evaluation of student's report
about company assignment by faculty advisor.
C. Chryssostomidis

13.78 Entrepreneurship

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
4-0-5

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

T. G. Gutowski

13.80J Mechanical Vibration
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 2.06J, 13.801)
Prereq.: 13.013J

U (Spring)

3-1-8

Concepts of mechanical vibration, including

free and forced vibration of single- and multi-
degree of freedom systems. Modal analysis
and matrix formulation of vibration problems.
Approximate solution techniques. Vibration
and modal analysis of continuous systems:
beams, rods, and strings. Introduction to the
response of linear systems to random excita-
tion. Numerous examples and applications of
vibration measurement and analysis, including
vibration isolation and dynamic absorbers,
ships, offshore structures, engines, and rotat-
ing machinery. Elective unit distribution: Ad-
vanced disciplinary, 9; Lab, 3.

F. Feng, J.K. Vandiver

13.801 Mechanical Vibration
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 13.80J, 2.06J)
Prereq.: 13.013J

U (Spring)

3-1-8

Meets with undergraduate subject 13.80J, but

assignments differ. See description under sub-
ject 13.80J.
F. Feng, J. K. Vandiver

13.81J Principles of Acoustics

(Same subject as 2.060J)

Prereq.: 13.013J or 2.03J or 16.040, 18.075
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.060J.
Staff

13.82J Sound and Structural Vibration

(Same subject as 2.063J)

Prereq.: 2.03J or 16.040 or 18.075
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.063J.
Staff

13.83J Structural Acoustics

(Same subject as 2.067J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.067J.
Staff

13.851 Fundamentals and Applications of
Underwater Sound

Prereq.: 18.075
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of underwater sound systems
as controlled by physical principles and proper-
ties of the ocean and its boundaries. Analyzes
sonar systems. Absorption in sea water. Trans-
mitting and receiving arrays. Scattering and
reflection. Refraction and propagation loss.
Noise and reverberation. Sonar design prin-
ciples. Applications in charting, navigation, sta-
tion keeping, target detection, fishing,
petroleum exploration, telemetry.

|. Dyer

13.861 Ocean and Seabed Acoustics |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys properties of the ocean and seabed
and of predictive models of sound propaga-
tion, in relation to sonar and seismic system
design and/or to the use of sound to uncover
oceanic properties. Ray and wave theories of
propagation in vertically stratified media. Ap-
proximate propagation theories for a horizontal-
ly varying ocean. Reflection and transmission
of sound by a stratified ocean bottom. Scatter-
ing from a random sea surface and seafloor.
Introductory knowledge of Fourier analysis,
probability, and wave propagation necessary.
(Woods Hole Staff): G. Frisk

13.862 Ocean and Seabed Acoustics Il

Prereq.: 13.861, permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of 13.861, treating ray and nor-
mal mode theory in greater depth, and intro-
ducing new topics. Emphasizes “state-of-
the-art” level in ocean acoustics. Includes ray
theory corrections, coupled normal-mode
theory, adiabatic approximation, continuum
and virtual modes, rough-surface scattering in
mode theory, ray-mode picture connections,
parabolic equation, and perturbative inversions
for both water column and ocean bottom
properties.

(Woods Hole Staff): J. F. Lynch

13.863 Ocean Seismo-Acoustics

Prereq.: 13.851 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Low-frequency propagation in ocean environ-
ments with special emphasis on the interaction
of the acoustic field in the water column with
seismic waves in seabed and ice cover. Fun-
damentals of ocean waveguide propagation.
Stress wave propagation in isotropic elastic
solids. The fluid-solid interface. Fluid-elastic
waveguides. Effects of seismic waves on
ocean sound propagation. Seismic interface
and surface waves in a stratified seabed. Seis-
mic waves in ice cover. Propagation over
anisotropic and porous seabeds.

H. Schmidt

Descriptions of Subjects 425


--- 04.pdf Page 29 ---
School of Engineering

13.871 Wave Scattering by Rough Surfaces

and Randomly inhomogenous Media

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An advanced-level subject designed to give

the student working knowledge of current tech-
niques in scattering theory as applied to rough
surfaces and randomly inhomogenous media.
Major application of theory presented is to
ocean acoustics, but can be used in other
acoustic and electromagnetic applications. In-
cludes basics of scattering theory, volume scat-
tering by discrete scatters (aerosols),
scattering by rough surfaces, satellite remote
sensing using rough-surface scattering, and
acoustic scattering from ocean internal waves.
(Woods Hole Staff): J. F. Lynch, D. J. Tang,

T. Stanton

13.92 Marine Policy

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Features major ocean uses and their as-
sociated national and international policy is-
sues through the vehicles of (a) policy analysis
and (b) case studies demonstrating relation-
ships among ocean uses and technologies,
and their relationship to politics and economic
infrastructure. Cases focus on living and non-
living resource management problems, and
pollution and conservation issues of environ-
mental management. Taught first half of term
in coordination with 13.94.

J. T. Kildow

13.94 Law for Ocean Systems

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Legal framework for managing ocean resour-

ces and systems, combining public law of the
sea, admiralty, and the US regulatory law.
OCS, tanker, shipping, and environmental
regimes. Law for new ocean technologies.
Questions of jurisdiction and implementation
arising from new economic zones or unilateral
extensions. Principles governing applicability
of civil and criminal law offshore. Focus on
relationship of law and technology. Taught
second half of term in coordination with 13.92.
J. D. Nyhart

13.951 Transport, Fate, and Effects of
Ocean Pollutants

Prereq.: 13.012 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides the background for quantitatively

predicting and estimating the distribution of pol-
lution, its by-products, and some of its effects
on marine ecosystems, starting with informa-
tion about the pollution source. Topics include:
equations of motion for ocean flows, ocean cur-
rents, molecular and turbulent diffusion, fluid
mechanical transport models, seawater proper-
ties and chemistry, important chemicals in the
ocean, sediment-chemical interactions, chemi-
cal-biological interactions, ocean contamina-
tions and their biological consequences.

J. H. Milgram; Woods Hole Staff

13.98J Environmental Management of the
Coast

(Same subject as 11.365J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Methods and concepts introduced through

case studies of management options for meet-
ing coastal environmental challenges. Includes
background in physical and ecological coastal
processes to provide foundation for under-
standing natural process change and the im-
plications of human interventions which stretch
or alter natural limitations. Cases focus on in-
Stitutional and regulatory frameworks for three
environmental themes: 1) impacts of global
climate change, 2) coastal pollution and
biodiversity, 3) conflicting uses.

J. T. Kildow

13.990J Oceanographic Systems |

(Same subject as 1.697J)
Prereq.: —

G (Summer)

2-4-6

Orientation subject for students entering the
MIT-Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
program in oceanographic engineering.
Oceanographic experiments of research inter-
est in Cape Cod waters carried through experi-
ment design, instrumentation design,
construction and testing, deployment, data
taking and interpretation of results. Research
teams made up of students in 13.990J and
13.991J together. Participation in summer
seminars at WHOI. Given at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution.

(Woods Hole Staff), J. F. Lynch

13.991J Oceanographic Systems Il

(Same subject as 1.698J)
Prereq.: —

G (Summer)

2-4-6

Continuation of 13.990J during second sum-
mer term in the MIT-WHOI Joint Program in
Oceanographic Engineering. Given at Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution.

(Woods Hole Staff)

13.998 Principles of Oceanographic
Instrument Systems — Sensors and
Measurements

Prereq.: 2.03J/13.013J, 18.075
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces theoretical and practical principles
of design of oceanographic sensor systems.
Transducer characteristics for acoustic, cur-
rent, temperature, pressure, electric, magnetic,
gravity, salinity, velocity, heat flow, and optical
devices. Limitations on these devices imposed
by ocean environment. Signal conditioning and
recording; noise, sensitivity, and sampling
limitations; standards. Principles of state-of-the-
art systems being used in physical oceanog-
raphy, geophysics, submersibles, acoustics
discussed in lectures by experts in these
areas. Laboratory project required.

(Woods Hole Staff): A. Williams, J. Irish,

C. Mazel (MIT)

13.999 Special Projects in Oceanographic
Engineering

(Same subject as 1.699J)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Special problems in oceanographic engineer-
ing, carried out under supervision of members
of the staff of the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. Given at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution.

(Woods Hole Staff)

13.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to be
arranged by the student and an appropriate
MIT faculty member. Consult Department
Headquarters.

Staff

426 Chapter VIII


--- 04.pdf Page 30 ---
Department of Economics Course 14

Course 14

General Economics and
Theory

14.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: 14.02

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

14.URG Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: 14.02

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Participation in research with an individual

faculty member or research group, inde-
pendent research or study under the guidance
of a faculty member. Admission by arrange-
ment with individual faculty member.

Consult L. Smith.

14.01 Principles of Microeconomics
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Introduces microeconomic concepts and

analysis. Supply and demand analysis,
theories of the firm and of individual behavior,
competition and monopoly, welfare

economics. Applications to problems of current
economic policy.

Fall Term: J. Harris

Spring Term: F. Fisher

14,02 Principles of Macroeconomics
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Provides an overview of macroeconomic is-

sues: the determination of output, employ-
ment, unemployment, interest rates, and
inflation. Monetary and fiscal policies are dis-
cussed, as are the public debt and internation-
al economic issues. Introduces basic models
of macroeconomics and illustrates principles
with the experience of the US and foreign
economies.

Fall Term: O. Blanchard

Spring Term: R. Caballero

Economics

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Humanities and Social Science.

14.03 Intermediate Applied Microeconomics

Prereq.: 14.01

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8 HASS

Credit cannot also be received for 14.04

Presents basic theory and applications of con-

sumer and producer behavior and welfare
analysis at an intermediate level. Emphasizes
applications, including the measurement of
productivity, rationing, insurance markets, and
intertemporal behavior.

Fall Term: D. Genesove

Spring Term: S. Athey

14.04 Intermediate Microeconomic Theory

Prereq.: 14.01, 18.02, 18.06

U (Fall)

4-0-8

Credit cannot also be received for 14.03

Basic theory of consumer behavior, production

and costs, partial equilibrium analysis of pric-
ing in competitive and monopolistic markets,
general equilibrium, welfare, and externalities.
Credit not given for both 14.03 and 14.04. May
not count toward HASS Requirement. Recom-
mended for students planning to apply to
graduate school in economics, accounting, or
finance.

L. Smith

14.05 Intermediate Applied
Macroeconomics

Prereq.: 14.02
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS

Uses the tools of macroeconomics to study

two or three macroeconomic policy problems
in depth. Possible topics include long-run
economic growth, the macroeconomics of the
transition to a modern capitalist society,
federal government deficits, Social Security,
the distribution of earnings and income, and
the Great Depression.

P. Temin

14.06 Intermediate Macroeconomic Theory

Prereq.: 14.02
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Thorough review of models of economic

growth and business cycles with applications
in fiscal, monetary, and commercial policy.
Recommended for students seers to apply
to graduate school in economics

J. Ventura

14,09 Reading Seminar in Economics

Prereq.: 14.04, 14.06

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of particular topics in
economics. Open to undergraduate students
by arrangement with individual faculty mem-
bers. Consult Department Headquarters.

J. Gruber

14.10 Reading Seminar in Economics

Prereq.: 14.04, 14.06

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of particular topics in
economics. Open to undergraduate students
by arrangement with individual faculty mem-
bers. Consult Department Headquarters.

J. Gruber

14.102 Mathematics for Economists
(New)

Prereq.: 18.01, 18.02, 18.06
G (Fall)
4-0-8

Covers some topics in mathematics that are
frequently used in economic theory and in ap-
plications. Topics include: 1) optimization
theory (including optimal control and recursive
methods); ii) probability theory; iii) topology
(continuity, compactness); iv) dynamical sys-
tems (including stability); v) convex analysis;
vi) fixed point theory. Presentation of each
topic self-contained.

A. Bisin, L. Smith

14.103 Dynamic Optimization and
Economic Applications
(New)

Prereq.: 14.102

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Stochastic processes, including Markov
chains, stochastic stability, stochastic calculus
and integration. Stochastic optimization, includ-
ing dynamic programming, stopping times,
regulated Brownian motion. Applications in-
clude growth, natural resources, asset pricing,
learning, investment.

Staff

Descriptions of Subjects 427


--- 04.pdf Page 31 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

14.111J Economics of Project
Evaluation

(Same subject as 1.148J)
Prereq.: 14.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Economic concepts of costs and benefits:
consumers’ and producers’ surplus; shadow
prices; and valuation of nonmarket costs and
benefits. Investment criteria and the discount
tate: static and dynamic; treatment of risk and
uncertainty. Pricing policies and investment
rules. Case studies in developed and under-
developed countries.

Consult P. Joskow.

14.12 Economic Applications of Game
Theory

Prereq.: 14.01

U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS

Analysis of strategic behavior in multi-person

economic settings. Introduction to Nash equi-
librium and its refinements: subgame-perfect
equilibrium and sequential equilibrium. Applica-
tions drawn from labor economics, the
economics of organization, industrial organiza-
tion, international trade, and macroeconomics.
D. Acemoglu

14.121 Microeconomic Theory |

Prereq.: 14.04 and permission of instructor

G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Individual choice and production, including

competitive markets and monopoly. Class size
limited.
S. Athey

14.122 Microeconomic Theory II

Prereq.: 14.121 and permission of instructor

G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to game theory. Class size limited.

G. Ellison

14.123 Microeconomic Theory Ill

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122, and permission of in-

structor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General equilibrium, capital theory, incomplete

markets, externalities, public goods. Class size
limited.
P. A. Diamond

14.124 Microeconomic Theory IV

Prereq.: 14.123 and permission of instructor

G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Information economics, externalities, public

goods and incentives. Market equilibria and
contract design. Class size limited.
B. Holmstrom

428 Chapter Vill

14.125 General Equilibrium

Prereq.: 14.04

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics include Arrow-Debreu economies,

general equilibrium economies with incomplete
markets, informational asymmetries, increas-
ing returns, imperfect competition. Mathemati-
cal techniques to study existence, regularity,
welfare properties of equilibria. Applications
provided with special emphasis on financial
markets, fiscal policy, and regulation.

Consult A. Bisin.

14.126 Game Theory

Prereq.: 14.122
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

How should economic agents act when their

optimal decisions depend on what they expect
other agents to do? We study various models
of equilibrium, which correspond to different
ways that the agents might make their
decisions, and various kinds of games — static
games, dynamic games, and games of incom-
plete information.

A. Banerjee, G. Ellison

14.127 Economics of Uncertainty
Prereq.: 14.124

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Part |: Fundamentals of information theory,

with applications to social learning, individual
experimentation, and search theory. Part II:
Models of decentralized trading with search,
models of trading with imperfect information.
D. Acemoglu, L, Smith

14.128 Dynamic Optimization and
Economic Applications

Prereq.: 14.101

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Deterministic optimization: maximum principle,

dynamic programming, calculus of variations,
optimal control, dynamic games. Stochastic op-
timization: stochastic optimal control and
dynamic programming, Markov processes, Ito
calculus, Markov games. Applications. Dynami-
cal systems: local and global analysis and
chaos.

Consult A. Bisin.

14.129 Contract Theory
Prereq.: 14.121, 14.451

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Recent developments in contract theory. In-

cludes hidden action and hidden information

models, dynamic agency issues, incomplete

contracts, and applications of contract theory
to theories of the firm and corporate financial
structure.

S. Athey, B. Holmstrom

14.141 Disequilibrium Foundations of
Equilibrium Economics

Prereq.: 14.122
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Does a competitive economy, with rational
agents taking advantage of disequilibrium op-
portunities for arbitrage, tend to approach equi-
librium? Is that equilibrium competitive?
Importance of the subject for the foundations
of usual economic analysis and the theory of
value. Historical review and modern theory of
stability in relation to above questions. Half-
term subject.

F. Fisher

14.191 Independent Research Paper

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

0-12-0 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Under supervision of a faculty member ap-
proved by Graduate Registration Officer, stu-
dent writes a substantial, probably publishable
research paper. Must be completed by the end
of a student’s second year to satisfy the
departmental minor requirement.

P. Temin

14.192 Supervised Research

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Student participates in research with an in-
dividual faculty member, with approval of
Graduate Registration Officer.

P. Temin

14.193 Seminar: Topics in Economics

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.451

G (Fall)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

14.194 Seminar: Topics in Economics

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.451

G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in
economics. Open to advanced graduate stu-
dents by arrangement with individual members
of the staff.

Consult Department Headquarters.

14.195, 14.196 Reading Seminar in
Economics

Prereq.: 14.121

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in
economics. Open to advanced graduate stu-
dents by arrangement with individual members
of the staff.

Consult Department Headquarters.


--- 04.pdf Page 32 ---
Department of Economics Course 14

14,198, 14.199 Teaching Introductory
Economics

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-2 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Required of teaching assistants in introductory

economics (14.01 and 14.02), under super-
vision of the faculty member in charge of the
subject.

14.198: J. Harris, F. Fisher

14.199: O. Blanchard, R. Caballero

Industrial Organization

14.20 Industrial Organization and
Public Policy

Prereq.: 14.01
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Analyzes the structure, behavior, and perfor-

mance of industrial markets in the US
economy. Topics include the measurement of
monopoly power, behavior of firms in oligopoly
markets, static and dynamic measures of
market performance, antitrust, research and
development, consumer protection policy, and
theory of the firm.

D. Genesove

14.21J Health Economics

(Same subject as HST.901J)
Prereq.: 14.01

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Applies theoretical and empirical tools of

economics to problems of health and medical
care delivery. Concentrates on selected
problems such as the welfare economics of
“health” as a commodity, hospitals and the
nonprofit sector, human capital and medical
manpower, and innovation in medicine.

J. E. Harris

14.23 Government Regulation of Industry
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 14.01
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Examines government regulation of prices,

entry, and product quality from a normative
and positive perspective. Theoretical analyses
of regulatory mechanisms and empirical
analyses of regulatory behavior and perfor-
mance are included. Regulatory reform, in-
dustry restructuring, and deregulation in
industries such as telecommunications,

electric power, airlines, and pharmaceuticals in
the US and abroad are covered.

P. Temin

14.24 Law and Economics
Prereq.: 14.01

U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS

Analysis of the role of the legal system in

providing an appropriate framework for market
transactions and in encouraging efficient
resource allocation. Contracts, torts, and
property law emphasized. Cases considered
along with general theory.

P. Diamond

14.25J Aerospace Economics

(Same subject as 16.800J)
Prereq.: 14.01

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 16.800J.
P. P. Belobaba

14.271 Industrial Organization |

Prereq.: 14.04
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers theoretical and empirical work dealing

with the structure, behavior, and performance
of firms and markets and core issues in an-
titrust. Topics include the organization of the
firm, monopoly, price discrimination, oligopoly,
monopolistic competition, product selection,
and advertising. Theoretical and empirical
work are integrated in each area.

G. Ellison, D. Genesove

14.272 Industrial Organization Il

Prereq.: 14.271
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A continuation of 14.271. Focuses on public

policy issues in industrial organization includ-
ing topics in antitrust policy, economic and so-
cial regulation, deregulation and privatization,
patent and R & D policies, and the political
economy of regulation. Theoretical and empiri-
cal work is integrated in each area.

P. Joskow, N. Rose

14.28 Competition in Telecommunications

(Subject meets with 15.020)
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Provides an introduction to the economics and

technology of telecommunications markets, in-
cluding markets for exchange and information
services, cellular telephone, long-distance ser-
vices, and both carrier and customer equip-
ment. The shifting roles of technology, Federal
and state government policies, and business
strategies in shaping these rapidly changing
markets are studied, with particular emphasis
on the roles of regulation and competition and
the likely evolution of technology, public policy,
and market structures over the next decade.
Undergraduates expected to complete an
extra assignment in order to receive the addi-
tional units of credit.

J. Hausman

14.286J Health Economics Seminar

(Same subject as HST.903J)

Prereq.: 14.04, permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced subject in economics of health-care
sector. Considers selected topics in depth,
such as design and financing of health in-
surance, behavior of nonprofit hospitals, role
of competition in the medical care market,
determinants of technological change, and ef-
fects of government regulations.

J. E. Harris

14.29 Topics in Political Economy
(New)

Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS

Reviews recent theoretical advances in the
field of political economy. Is politics mainly
about conflicting interests or about informa-
tion? Positive and normative analysis of politi-
cal institutions in terms of mechanism design.
Theory and empirical data about party position-
ing, polarization, coalition formation, and
Stability. Political-economic cycles, competing
explanations of the size of countries. Voting as
aggregating information, voting vs. the market.
Should one expect efficient outcomes? Applica-
tion to taxation and trade liberalization.

D. Spector

14.294 Seminar in Political Economy

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122, and permission of in-
structor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Political economics is the study of group or col-
lective decision-making processes and the in-
Stitutions that evolve to implement them.
Includes collective choice theory, interest
group competition, theories of economic
regulation, legislative behavior, bureaucracy,
and behavior of administrative agencies. Both
theoretical and empirical work are discussed.
P. Joskow, J. Poterba

14.295J Theory of Collective Choice:
Empirical Tests

(Same subject as 17.808J)
Prereq.: 17.806J

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 17.808J.
S. Ansolabehere

14.296J Theory of Collective Choice:
Institutions and Positive Political Theory
(Subject meets with 17.806J, 17.805)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9

See description under subject 17.806J.
J. M. Snyder, Jr.

Descriptions of Subjects 429


--- 04.pdf Page 33 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

Or n———————————— — —  — ——————

Statistics and
Econometrics

14.30 Introduction to Statistical Method
in Economics
Prereq.: 18.02

U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 REST

Self-contained introduction to statistics with

economic applications. Elements of probability
theory, sampling theory, statistical estimation,
regression analysis, and hypothesis testing.
Elementary econometrics and other applica-
tions of statistical tools to economic data. May
not count toward HASS Requirement.

Fall Term: S. Ellison

Spring Term: J. Bai

14.31 Econometrics
Prereq.: 14.30

U (Fall, Spring)
3-4-5 Institute LAB

Introduces basic econometric techniques, em-

phasizing the application of least squares to
cross section and time series data. Examples
include applications to labor economics,
monetary economics, and financial economics.
Advanced topics covered include two stage
least squares, panel data methods, and limited
dependent variable models. May not count
toward HASS Requirement.

Fall Term: D. Costa

Spring Term: J. Angrist

14.381 Statistical Method in Economics

Prereq.: 18.02, permission of instructor
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Self-contained introduction to probability and

Statistics as background for advanced
econometrics. Elements of probability theory;
sampling theory; asymptotic approximations;
decision-theory approach to statistical estima-
tion focusing on regression, hypothesis testing,
and maximum-likelihood methods. Illustrations
from economics and application of these con-

cepts to economic problems. Class size limited.

J. Bai

14.382 Econometrics |

Prereq.: 14.101, 14.381, permission of instruc-

tor
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Specification and estimation of the linear
regression model. Departures from the stand-
ard Gauss-Markov assumptions include
heteroskedasticity, serial correlation, and er-
rors in variables. Advanced topics include
generalized least squares, instrumental vari-
ables, nonlinear regression, and limited de-
pendent variable models. Economic
applications are discussed. Class size limited.
J. Hausman, W. Newey

14.383 Econometrics li

Prereq.: 14.382, permission of instructor

G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers identification and estimation of linear

and nonlinear simultaneous equations models.
Requires econometrics paper due at the end
of IAP. Class size limited.

J. Hausman

14.384 Time Series Analysis

Prereq.: 14.382 or 14.388
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and application of time series methods

in econometrics, including representation
theorems, decomposition theorems, predic-
tion, spectral analysis, estimation with station-
ary and nonstationary processes, VARs, and
method of moments procedures.

J. Bai

14.385 Nonlinear Econometric Analysis

Prereq.: 14.382 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Nonlinear econometric models, including large

sample theory for estimation and hypothesis
testing, generalized method of moments, es-
timation of censored and truncated specifica-
tions and duration models, and nonparametric
and semiparametric estimation. Methods il-
lustrated with economic applications.

W. Newey

14.386 Advanced Topics in Applied
Econometrics

Prereq.: 14.383
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on recent applications of econometric

tools. Topics include structural change,
Markov switching, stochastic volatility,
threshold auto-regression, models for duration
data, discrete choice models, nonparametric
methods, quantile regression and other robust
methods. Applications will be drawn from labor
economics, financial economics, industrial or-
ganization, and public finance.

W. Newey

14.389 Econometrics Paper
Prereq.: 14.382 or 14.31

G (Fall)

0-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Paper in econometrics required of all Ph.D.

candidates who do not take 14.383. Paper due
at the end of IAP.
J. Hausman

14.391 Workshop in Economic
Research

Prereq.: 14.124, 14.454

G (Fall)

2-0-10 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

14.392 Workshop in Economic
Research

Prereq.: 14.124, 14.454

G (Spring)

2-0-10 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Develops research ability of students through
intensive discussion of dissertation research
as it proceeds, individual or group research
projects, and critical appraisal of current
reported research. Workshops divided into
various fields, depending on interest and size.
Consult P. Temin.

For additional related subjects in Statistics,
see:

Civil and Environmental Engineering: 1.03,
1.151, 1.155, 1.202, 1.203J, 1.205, and 1.732

Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science: 6.041, 6.231, 6.245, 6.262, 6.264J,
6.430J, 6.431, 6.432, and 6.435

Management: 15.034, 15.061, 15.065,
15.070, 15.074, 15.075, 15.076, 15.078,
15.098, 15.306, and 15.832

Mathematics: 18.05, 18.175, 18.177, 18.313,
18.440, 18.441, 18.443, 18.445, 18.446,
18.457, 18.458, 18.465, and 18.466

See also: 2.061, 2.830, 2.870, 5.70, 5.72,
7.02, 8.044, 8.08, 10.816, 11.220, 11.221,
16.322, 17.842, 17.846, 22.38, HST.191, and
MAS.622J.

National Income and
Finance

14.40 Advanced Macroeconomics

Prereq.: 14.05 or 14.06; 14.31 recommended
U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Topics in advanced macroeconomics, possibly
including but not limited to models of economic
growth, term structure of interest rates, money
and overlapping generations, time-inconsisten-
cy, consumption, and investment. Emphasis
on relating theory to testable implications.

A. Bernard

430 Chapter Vill


--- 04.pdf Page 34 ---
Department of Economics Course 14

14.41 Public Economics
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS

The study of government expenditure and taxa-

tion policies. Externalities and the environ-
ment; public goods such as education; social
insurance programs such as social security;
health and welfare policy; optimal taxation
policy; taxation and economic behavior.

J. Gruber

14.416J Introduction to Financial
Economics

(Same subject as 15.416J)
Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122

G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.416J.
J. Wang

14.440J Advanced Financial
Economics |

(Same subject as 15.440J)
Prereq.: 15.416J

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.440J.
Information: D. Scharfstein.

14.441J Advanced Financial
Economics Il

(Same subject as 15.441J)

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122, or 15.416J
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.441J.
D. Gromb

14.442J Advanced Financial Economics Ill

(Same subject as 15.442J)

Prereq.: 14.382, 15.415, 15.416J, and permis-
sion of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.442J.

A. W. Lo

14.451 Macroeconomic Theory |
Prereq.: 14.06, permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The basic machines of macroeconomics. Ram-

sey, Solow, Samuelson-Diamond, RBCs,
ISLM, Mundell-Fleming, Fischer-Taylor. How
they work, what shortcuts they take, and how
they can be used. Half-term subject. Class
size limited.

O. Blanchard

14.452 Macroeconomic Theory Il
Prereq.: 14.451, permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Models of economic growth, old and new. Half-

term subject. Class size limited.
J. Ventura

14.453 Macroeconomic Theory Ill

Prereq.: 14.452, permission of instructor

G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Consumption and savings decisions under cer-

tainty and uncertainty. Aggregate savings,
wealth, and fiscal policy. Portfolio choice and
asset pricing. Investment and finance
decisions. Half-term subject. Class size limited.
R. Caballero

14.454 Macroeconomic Theory IV
Prereq.: 14.453, permission of instructor
G (Fall)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The macroeconomic implications of imperfec-

tions in labor markets, goods markets, credit
and financial markets. The role of nominal
rigidities. Half-term subject. Class size limited.
M. Hammour

14.461 Advanced Macroeconomics |

Prereq.: 14.122, 14.452
G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics change from year to year. In 1996-97,

the main topics are complete markets and busi-
ness cycles, representative agent models, in-
complete markets and business cycles,
financial markets, restructuring and realloca-
tion, sunk costs and incomplete contracts,
private information and herd behavior.

A. Bisin, R. Caballero

14.462 Advanced Macroeconomics Il

Prereq.: 14.461
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics change from year to year. In 1996-97,

the main topics are (1) search and efficiency
wage models, unions and European unemploy-
ment, human capital and income distribution,
increasing returns and imperfect competition.
(2) Issues in monetary and fiscal policy. Sour-
ces of economic fluctuations.

D. Acemoglu, O. Blanchard

14.471 Public Economics |
Prereq.: 14.04

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and evidence on government taxation

policy. Topics include tax incidence; optimal
tax theory; the effect of taxation on labor supp-
ly and savings; corrective taxes for exter-
nalities; taxation and corporate behavior; and

tax expenditure policy.
J. Poterba

14.472 Public Economics II

Prereq.: 14.04
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and evidence on government expendi-
ture policy. Topics include the theory of public
goods; education; state and local public
goods; political economy; redistribution and
welfare policy; social insurance programs such
as social security and unemployment in-
surance; and health care policy.

P. Diamond, J. Gruber

14.473 Income Distribution, Growth, and
Public Finance

Prereq.: 14.124

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews recent theoretical advances in the
field of income distribution and growth, as well
as the economics and politics of public finance
in these models. Topics include income and
wealth distribution with asymmetric informa-
tion, models of social and intergenerational
mobility, optimal dynamic taxation, growth and
unemployment, politico-economic models.
Also covers long-run empirical evidence on in-
come distribution, inequality, social mobility,
and growth.

Consult T. Piketty.

14.474 Advanced Topics in Public
Economics
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 14.124
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to current research in one or
several sub-fields of public economics. Topics
may include the design and evaluation of so-
cial insurance programs, the effect of income
taxes on firm and individual behavior, the politi-
cal economy of taxation and expenditure

programs.
J. Gruber, J. Poterba

International, Interregional,
and Urban Economics

14,54 International Trade

Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

U (Spring)

4-0-8 HASS

Introduction to the theory of international trade
and finance with applications to current policy

issues.
Consult J. Ventura.

Descriptions of Subjects 431


--- 04.pdf Page 35 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

14.573J The Economics of Cities and
Regions

(Same subject as 1.283J, 11.410J)
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The theory of urban land and housing markets,
and the spatial development of cities. The
roles played by transportation systems and
local governments in shaping urban location
patterns. Interregional competition, economic
development, and the migration of labor and
capital.

W. Wheaton

14.581 International Economics |
Prereq.: 14.04

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory of international trade and foreign invest-

ment with applications in commercial policy.
J. Ventura

14.582 International Economics Il

Prereq.: 14.06, 14.581

G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Adjustment in international economic relations,

with attention to foreign exchange markets,
balances of payments, and the international
monetary system.

R. Dombusch

Labor Economics and
Industrial Relations

14.63 Labor in Industrial Society

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Examines the role of technology, class,
gender, race, and law through a historical dis-
cussion of the three most important changes in
the US economy this century: 1) the rise and
decline of unions; 2) the entrance of women
into the paid labor force; and 3) the migration
of African Americans into the industrial labor
markets of the Northern cities. Economic
studies integrated with insights from other so-
cial sciences. Readings are supplemented by
documentary films and guest speakers from
outside MIT.

P. Osterman

14.64 Labor Economics and Public Policy

Prereq.: 14.01 or permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Theory and evidence concerning the function-

ing of the labor market. Particular emphasis on
the roles played by government and institu-
tions. Topics include minimum wages, labor
market effects of social insurance and welfare
programs, the collective bargaining relation-
ship, discrimination, and unemployment.

S. Pischke

14.65J American Living Standards and
Income Inequality

(Subject meets with 11.022J, 11.450)
Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 11.022J.
F. S. Levy

14.671J Labor Economics |

(Same subject as 15.671J)
Prereq.: 14.64 or 15.660

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to labor economics, stressing

various approaches to labor market analysis.
Special attention devoted to theories of worker
motivation and behavior, the structure of labor
markets, the determinants of wage levels and
unemployment, and the historical evolution of
labor market institutions.

M. Piore

14.672J Labor Economics Il

(Same subject as 15.672J)
Prereq.: 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Neoclassical analysis of the labor market and

its institutions. A systematic development of
the theory of labor supply, labor demand, and
human capital theory. Topics discussed also in-
clude theories of wage and employment deter-
mination, turnover, search, unemployment,
equalizing differences, and union behavior.
Particular emphasis on the interaction of
theoretical and empirical modeling.

J. Angrist, S. Pischke

14.674J Managing People and
Organizations in a Changing World
Economy

(Same subject as 15.674J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.674J.
Consult R. M. Locke.

14.691J Research Seminar in Industrial
Relations

(Same subject as 15.691J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

14.692J Research Seminar in Industrial

Relations

(Same subject as 15.692J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.692J.
Information: T. A. Kochan.

Economic History

14.71 Historical Perspectives on Current
Economic Issues

Prereq.: 14.01, 14.02
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Provides a historical perspective on the deter-
minants and consequences of economic
growth. Changes in population, education,
technology, institutions, business organization,
financial markets, labor markets, and govern-
ment regulation are examined. Focus is
primarily on the US.

D. Costa

14.72 Capitalism and Its Critics

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

This subject addresses the evolution of the
modern capitalist economy and evaluates its
current structure and performance. Various
paradigms of economics are contrasted and
compared (neoclassical, Marxist,
socioeconomic, and neocorporate) in order to
understand how modern capitalism has been
shaped and how it functions in today’s
economy. Readings include classics in
economic thought as well as contemporary
analyses. Subject stresses general analytic
reasoning and problem formulation rather than
specific analytic techniques. May not be used
for Economics concentration. One economics
HASS-D subject may be used as an
economics elective for the economics major
and minor.

M. Piore

14.731 Economic History

Prereq.: 14.04, 14.06
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A survey of world economic history, designed
to introduce economics graduate students to
the subject matter and methodology of
economic history. Topics chosen to show a
wide variety of historical experience and il-
luminate the process of industrialization. Term
paper due at the end of IAP.

D. Costa, P. Temin

Economic Development

14.74 Economic Growth and Development

Prereq.: 14.02

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Analysis of the problems of economic growth
and development, both microeconomic and
macroeconomic, including peasant agriculture,
demographic change, urbanization, and inter-
national trade. Considers policy measures to
promote development and growth.

Consult M. Kremer.

432 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 1 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

14.573J The Economics of Cities and
Regions

(Same subject as 1.283J, 11.410J)
Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The theory of urban land and housing markets,
and the spatial development of cities. The
roles played by transportation systems and
local governments in shaping urban location
patterns. Interregional competition, economic
development, and the migration of labor and
capital.

W. Wheaton

14.581 International Economics |
Prereq.: 14.04

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory of international trade and foreign invest-

ment with applications in commercial policy.
J. Ventura

14.582 International Economics Il

Prereq.: 14.06, 14.581

G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Adjustment in international economic relations,

with attention to foreign exchange markets,
balances of payments, and the international
monetary system.

R. Dombusch

Labor Economics and
Industrial Relations

14.63 Labor in Industrial Society

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Examines the role of technology, class,
gender, race, and law through a historical dis-
cussion of the three most important changes in
the US economy this century: 1) the rise and
decline of unions; 2) the entrance of women
into the paid labor force; and 3) the migration
of African Americans into the industrial labor
markets of the Northern cities. Economic
studies integrated with insights from other so-
cial sciences. Readings are supplemented by
documentary films and guest speakers from
outside MIT.

P. Osterman

14.64 Labor Economics and Public Policy

Prereq.: 14.01 or permission of instructor
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Theory and evidence concerning the function-

ing of the labor market. Particular emphasis on
the roles played by government and institu-
tions. Topics include minimum wages, labor
market effects of social insurance and welfare
programs, the collective bargaining relation-
ship, discrimination, and unemployment.

S. Pischke

14.65J American Living Standards and
Income Inequality

(Subject meets with 11.022J, 11.450)
Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 11.022J.
F. S. Levy

14.671J Labor Economics |

(Same subject as 15.671J)
Prereq.: 14.64 or 15.660

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to labor economics, stressing

various approaches to labor market analysis.
Special attention devoted to theories of worker
motivation and behavior, the structure of labor
markets, the determinants of wage levels and
unemployment, and the historical evolution of
labor market institutions.

M. Piore

14.672J Labor Economics Il

(Same subject as 15.672J)
Prereq.: 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Neoclassical analysis of the labor market and

its institutions. A systematic development of
the theory of labor supply, labor demand, and
human capital theory. Topics discussed also in-
clude theories of wage and employment deter-
mination, turnover, search, unemployment,
equalizing differences, and union behavior.
Particular emphasis on the interaction of
theoretical and empirical modeling.

J. Angrist, S. Pischke

14.674J Managing People and
Organizations in a Changing World
Economy

(Same subject as 15.674J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.674J.
Consult R. M. Locke.

14.691J Research Seminar in Industrial
Relations

(Same subject as 15.691J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

14.692J Research Seminar in Industrial

Relations

(Same subject as 15.692J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.692J.
Information: T. A. Kochan.

Economic History

14.71 Historical Perspectives on Current
Economic Issues

Prereq.: 14.01, 14.02
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Provides a historical perspective on the deter-
minants and consequences of economic
growth. Changes in population, education,
technology, institutions, business organization,
financial markets, labor markets, and govern-
ment regulation are examined. Focus is
primarily on the US.

D. Costa

14.72 Capitalism and Its Critics

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

This subject addresses the evolution of the
modern capitalist economy and evaluates its
current structure and performance. Various
paradigms of economics are contrasted and
compared (neoclassical, Marxist,
socioeconomic, and neocorporate) in order to
understand how modern capitalism has been
shaped and how it functions in today’s
economy. Readings include classics in
economic thought as well as contemporary
analyses. Subject stresses general analytic
reasoning and problem formulation rather than
specific analytic techniques. May not be used
for Economics concentration. One economics
HASS-D subject may be used as an
economics elective for the economics major
and minor.

M. Piore

14.731 Economic History

Prereq.: 14.04, 14.06
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A survey of world economic history, designed
to introduce economics graduate students to
the subject matter and methodology of
economic history. Topics chosen to show a
wide variety of historical experience and il-
luminate the process of industrialization. Term
paper due at the end of IAP.

D. Costa, P. Temin

Economic Development

14.74 Economic Growth and Development

Prereq.: 14.02

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Analysis of the problems of economic growth
and development, both microeconomic and
macroeconomic, including peasant agriculture,
demographic change, urbanization, and inter-
national trade. Considers policy measures to
promote development and growth.

Consult M. Kremer.

432 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 2 ---
Department of Economics Course 14

14.75J Theories of Economic Development

(Same subject as 11.102J)
Prereq.: 14.01, 14.02

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Macroeconomic theories of economic growth
emphasizing capital accumulation, education,
technological change, and political economy;
classic theories of development emphasizing
division of labor, dualistic economies, and the
big push; political and sociological approaches
to development, and their application to
developing countries. Topics in economic
development: diffusion of technology, popula-
tion and fertility, corruption, education, and
health policy.

A. Banerjee

14.76 Income Distribution

Prereq.: 14.03 or 14.04

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Introduction to the microeconomic deter-

minants and macroeconomic implications of in-
come inequality: How is inequality generated?
What is the interplay with growth and develop-
ment? What are the determinants of redistribu-
tive politics? Covers long-run evidence on
inequality and mobility.

Consult T. Piketty.

14.771 Development Economics:

Microeconomic Issues and Policy Models

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Agricultural issues: peasant behavior, land

tenancy, factor markets, and factor payments.
Urban employment, rural-urban migration, and
urban bias. National income estimation and
welfare evaluation, social accounting matrices.
Rationale and experience of development
policy, aggregate growth models, multisector
static and dynamic programming models,
general equilibrium models, cost-benefit

is

A. Banerjee, A. Berard, M. Kremer

14.772 Development Economics:
Macroeconomics and Socialist Economy
Reform

Prereq.: 14.121, 14.451

G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Dynamic models of development emphasizing

migration, modernization and technological
change; static and dynamic models of political
economy; rent-seeking in and outside the
government; trade liberalization, macro-
economic stabilization and reform; the

of income distribution and institution-
al change; aid effectiveness; socialist economy
reform; Eastern Europe, the former Soviet
Union, and China.
A. Banerjee, A. Bernard, M. Kremer

14.778J Economic Institutions and Growth
Policy Analysis

(Same subject as 11.486J, 17.184J)
Prereq.: 11.210

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.486J.
A. Amsden

14.781J Political Economy I: Theories of
the State and the Economy

(Same subject as 17.156J, 15.678J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 17.156J.
M. Piore, S. Berger

14.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, |AP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research and writing of

thesis; to be arranged by the student with su-
pervising committee.

Descriptions of Subjects 433


--- 05.pdf Page 3 ---
Sloan School of Management

Course 15

Management

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the Sloan School of
Management.

Managerial Economics

15.010 Economic Analysis for Business
Decisions

Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent
G (Fall)
4-0-8

15.011 Economic Analysis for Business
Decisions

Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent
G (Fall)
4-0-8

Introduces students to principles of
microeconomic analysis used in managerial
decision making. Topics include demand
analysis, cost and production functions, the be-
havior of competitive and non-competitive
markets, sources and uses of market power,
and game theory and competitive strategy,
with applications to various business and
public policy decisions. Antitrust policy and
other government regulations are also dis-
cussed. 15.010 restricted to first-year Sloan
master’s students. 15.011 primarily for non-
Sloan School students.

H. D. Jacoby, R. S. Pindyck, N. L. Rose

15.012 Applied Macro- and International
Economics

Prereq.: 14.02 or equivalent
G (Spring, Summer)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Macroeconomics, international trade, and

finance, emphasizing implications for business
behavior. Macroeconomic topics: business
cycles and their effects on industries,

monetary and fiscal policy, inflation and un-
employment, long-term economic growth, mac-
roeconomic forecasting. International topics:
balance of payments, exchange rates, trade
and specialization, trade policy and internation-
al competition, international lending and invest-
ment, the international debt problem and world
financial system. Summer term restricted to
Management of Technology students.

J. J. Rotemberg, L. C. Thurow

15.013 Industrial Economics for Strategic
Decisions

Prereq.: 15.010 or 15.011 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Applies principles of industrial economics most

relevant for corporate strategy to analysis of
particular industries. Topics: market structure
and its determinants; rational strategic be-
havior in “small numbers” situations; strategies
for price and nonprice competition; dynamic
pricing, output, and advertising decisions;
entry and entry deterrence; evolution of in-
dustries.

T. M. Stoker

15.018 Management and Policy in the
International Economy

Prereq.: 15.012 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines major economic developments shap-

ing the international business environment.
Topics: causes and implications of exchange
rate volatility, persistent imbalances in the US,
integration in Western Europe, transition in
Eastern Europe, growth in debtor economies,
Japan's expanding international role, and
regionalization.

R. Dornbusch

15.019 International Trade and
Competition

Prereq.: 15.012 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines international competitive strategy

and the role of governments in setting the
terms of international competition, drawing on
insights from economics. Topics: competitive
advantage and comparative advantage, pric-
ing across exchange rates, location and licens-
ing decisions, foreign direct investment, trade
with scale and learning effects, protectionism,
strategic trade policy, and recent develop-
ments in trade negotiations.

R. Dombusch

15.020 Competition in
Telecommunications

(Subject meets with 14.28)

Prereq.: 15.010 or 15.011 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides an introduction to the economics and
technology of telecommunications markets, in-
cluding markets for exchange and information
services, cellular telephone, long-distance ser-
vices, and both carrier and customer equip-
ment. The convergence of cable TV and
telecommunications and the competitive emer-
gence of the Internet are covered in depth.
The shifting roles of technology, Federal and
state government policies, and business
strategies in shaping these rapidly changing
markets are studied, with particular emphasis
on the roles of regulation and competition and
the likely evolution of technology, public policy,
and market structures over the next decade.
Undergraduates expected to complete an
extra assignment in order to receive the addi-
tional 3 units of credit.

J. A. Hausman

15.021J Real Estate Economics

(Same subject as 11.433J)
Prereq.: 14.01 or 15.010 or 15.011
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.433J.
W. C. Wheaton

15.024 Applied Economics for Managers

Prereq.: —
G (Summer)
3-0-6

Develops facility with concepts, language, and
analysis tools of economics. Covers
microeconomics, macroeconomics, and inter-
national trade and payments. Emphasizes in-
tegration of theory, data, and judgment in the
analysis of corporate decisions and public
policy, and in the assessment of changing US
and international business environments.
Restricted to Sloan Fellows.

Consult S. C. Lowance.

434 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 4 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.034 Applied Econometrics and
Forecasting for Management

Prereq.: 15.061 or 15.075
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Designed for students interested in applied

econometric methods and business forecast-
ing. Emphasizes problems typically en-
countered in conducting empirical econometric
research, in evaluating results and testing
hypotheses, and in constructing forecasts. Re-
quires term paper. Problem sets involve work-
ing with econometric models and the computer.
T. M. Stoker

15.035 Pricing Strategy

Prereq.: 15.010 or 15.011

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Draws on research in marketing and
economics to present principles of profitable
pricing and methods of applying them. Topics
include pricing in oligopolies, implications of
cost and demand dynamics, market segmenta-
tion, pricing new products, quantity discounts
and nonlinear pricing, product-line pricing, and
pricing in distribution channels. Antitrust and
other legal issues discussed.

R. L. Schmalensee

15.036 Modern Econometrics for
Management

Prereq.: 15.034 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Workshop in advanced econometric methods

used in management research and business
planning. Includes some estimation theory
combined with applications of state-of-the-art
nonlinear econometric techniques. A strong
foundation in applied linear regression
methods is assumed. Topics covered: non-
parametric option pricing models, discrete
choice models of brand-name valuation and
other quantitative models of managerial
decision making as used in marketing,
strategy, finance, and economic business plan-
ning. Essential estimation theory, including
that for nonlinear models, semiparametric and
nonparametric estimation, and time series
analysis. Presentations by faculty and outside
practitioners.

T. M. Stoker, E. R. Berndt

Operations
Research/Statistics

15.053 Introduction to Management Science

(Subject meets with 15.058)
Prereq.: 18.06

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8 REST

See description under subject 15.058.
J. B. Orlin, J. F. Shapiro

15.057 Systems Optimization
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application-oriented introduction to systems op-
timization focuses on understanding system
tradeoffs. Introduces modeling methodology
(linear, integer and nonlinear programming,
genetic algorithms), modeling tools (sensitivity
and postoptimality analysis), software, and ap-
plications in production planning and schedul-
ing, inventory planning, personnel scheduling,
distribution systems planning, project schedul-
ing, facility sizing and capacity expansion, and
product development.

T. L. Magnanti

15.058 Introduction to Management Science

(Subject meets with 15.053)
Prereq.: 18.06 or equivalent
G (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8

Emphasizes the formulation, optimization, and

interpretation of mathematical models of
management decision problems arising in
manufacturing, transportation, service or-
ganizations, finance and marketing. Classes of
models include linear and mixed integer
programming, portfolio optimization, decision
analysis, and Monte Carlo simulation.
Homework exercises emphasize model for-
mulation and solution by computer.

J. B. Orlin, J. F. Shapiro

15.059 Optimization Modeling for Managers

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops facility and managerial use of linear,

mixed-integer, and nonlinear optimization
models. Also addresses the development of
advanced decision support systems based on
models and organizational adaptation to their
use. Applications and case studies in manufac-
turing, logistics, finance, and marketing.

J. F. Shapiro

15.060 Data, Models, and Decisions

Prereq.: 18.01 or equivalent
G (Fall, Summer)
4-0-8

Introduces students to the basic tools in using

data to make informed management
decisions. Covers introductory probability,
decision analysis, basic statistics, regression,
simulation, linear and nonlinear optimization,
and optimization under uncertainty. Computer
spreadsheet exercises and examples drawn
from marketing, finance, operations manage-
ment, and other management functions. Fall
term restricted to first-year Sloan Master's stu-
dents.

R. M. Freund, D. Bertsimas, V. Nguyen

15.061 Intermediate Statistics

Prereq.: 15.060 or equivalent
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A follow-on subject to 15.060 that deals in
greater depth with probabilistic and statistical
ideas and applications.

A. |. Bamett

15.063 Management Decision Support
Models

Prereq.: —
G (Summer)
3-0-6

Introduces students to the basic tools in using
data to make informed management
decisions. Covers introductory probability,
decision analysis, basic statistics, regression,
simulation, and linear optimization. Computer
spreadsheet exercises and examples drawn
from marketing, finance, operations manage-
ment, and other management functions.
Restricted to Sloan Fellows.

R. M. Freund

15.064J Engineering Probability and
Statistics

(Same subject as 6.430J, 3.81J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.430J.
A. W. Drake

15.065 Decision Analysis

Prereq.: 15.060 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic theory of decision making under uncer-
tainty. Topics: decision trees, influence
diagrams, quantification of judgments and
preferences, the value of information, Bayes
theorem, the structuring of complex decisions,
and multi-attributed utility theory interspersed
with applications in law, medicine, and
management. A project report and class
presentation in place of final exam.

G. M. Kaufman

15.066J System Optimization and Analysis
for Manufacturing

(Same subject as 2.851J, 3.83J)
Prereq.: 18.02

G (Summer)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to mathematical modeling, op-
timization, simulation, and dynamic systems as
applied to manufacturing. Linear systems,
simulation, linear programming, network flow
problems, integer and nonlinear programming,
and computer applications for manufacturing
processes and systems. Restricted to Leaders
for Manufacturing students.

S. C. Graves, J. P. Clark

Descriptions of Subjects 435


--- 05.pdf Page 5 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.067 Competitive Decision Making and
Negotiation
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Problems of decision making in competitive

and conflict situations when behavior of com-
petitors or adversaries affects decisions. Par-
ticipation in about twenty-two negotiation
exercises that simulate competitive business
situations characterized by a high degree of
uncertainty and sophisticated competitors
provides experience in making rapid but calcu-
lated decisions. Topics covered are distributive
and integrative bargaining with two or more
parties, auctions, fair division, and coalition for-
mation. Discussion of ethical dilemmas in
negotiation.

G. M. Kaufman

15.068 Advanced Statistics

Prereq.: 15.061 or equivalent
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Follow-on subject to 15.061. Applied treatment

of analysis of variance, nonparametric
methods, forecasting, and “reductionist” techni-
ques like factor analysis.

A. |. Bamett

15.069 Experimental Design and Taguchi
Methods

Prereq.: 15.064J or 6.430J or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides greater depth in statistics and its ap-

plications for first- and second-year Leaders
for Manufacturing (LFM) students. Primary
focus is on experimental design, response sur-
face optimization and Taguchi methods. Other
topics depend on class interest. Case studies,
often drawn from LFM internship projects, are
a part of the subject. Primarily for students in
the LFM Program; others by permission of in-
structor.

R. E. Welsch

15.070 Advanced Stochastic Processes

Prereq.: 6.262, 18.100, or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98; G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers continuous-time stochastic processes.

Topics include weak convergence, diffusion
processes, heavy traffic approximations of
queueing networks, and stochastic integration,
with a strong emphasis on analysis of
Brownian motion. Examples from several prob-
lem areas, including manufacturing, telecom-
munications, finance, and electrical
engineering, are discussed to illustrate and
motivate the mathematical concepts. Alternate
years.

V. Nguyen

15.072 Queues: Theory and
Applications

Prereq.: 6.262 or 6.432

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Modeling and analysis of queueing systems,

with applications in communications, manufac-
turing, operations research, computers, ser-
vice industries, transportation, and urban
systems. Simple Markovian queues, networks
of queues, non-Markovian single and multi-
server queues, priority queues, bounds and ap-
proximations, statistical inference. Leads to
research opportunities.

L. Wein, D. Bertsimas

15.073J Logistical and Transportation
Planning Methods

(Same subject as 1.203J, 6.281J, 11.526J,

13.665J, 16.76J)

Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.203J.
A. |. Barnett, R. C. Larson, A. R. Odoni

15.074 Mathematical Models and Policy
Analysis

Prereq.: 15.061 or 15.075
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Case-study method exploring strengths and

weaknesses of mathematical models (especial-
ly those related to data analysis) that affect
decision making of legislatures, corporations,
courts, and regulatory agencies. Topics: car-
cinogenic hazards of various substances,
deterrent effect of criminal sanctions, statistical
evidence in job-discrimination proceedings, ef-
fective operation of mass-transit systems.

A. |. Barnett

15.075 Applied Statistics

Prereq.: 6.041 or 18.440
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces statistical data analysis, concentrat-

ing on techniques used in management
science, finance, and engineering. Topics:
Statistical graphics, estimation, forecasting,
Statistical computing; basics of sampling,
quality control, design of experiments, regres-
sion, and diagnostics.

Information: G. M. Kaufman.

15.076 Statistical Methodology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Designed for Ph.D. students in all disciplines
with a strong mathematical background. Em-
phasis on the basic concepts of mathematical
statistics indicating the relation of theory to
practice. Topics covered: random variables,
probability, estimation, hypothesis testing,
regression analysis, and nonparametric statis-
tics. Differs from 15.075 in emphasis on deriva-
tion of the major “elementary” results and
theory needed to perform statistical analysis in
students’ own research.

B. Zhou

15.078 Quality Improvement Via Statistics

Prereq.: 15.060

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops students’ ability to employ statistical
process control and experimental design in pur-
suit of quality improvement. Emphasis is on un-
derstanding the structure of statistical quality
control methods and on when and how to
deploy them. Managerial issues that arise in
the implementation of statistical quality contro!
are explored via case studies. Students apply
process control charts, experimental designs,
and response surface methods to data. Project
required.

G. M. Kaufman

15.079 Applied Multivariate Methods

Prereq.: 18.06, 15.075 or 18.441 or 18.443
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and application of commonly used tech-
niques involving multivariate data. Attention
devoted to specific applications, and to com-
putational facilities for applying the methods.
Selects topics from the following: multivariate
regression, discriminate analysis, and pattern
classification. Cluster analysis, factor analysis,
and principal components. Multidimensional
scale analysis. Contingency tables.
Information: G. M. Kaufman.

15.081J Introduction to Mathematical
Programming

(Same subject as 6.251J)
Prereq.: 18.06

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.251J.
D. Bertsimas, J. N. Tsitsiklis

436 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 6 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.082 Network Optimization

Prereq.: 15.081J or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Network models for industrial logistics sys-

tems, transportation systems, communication
systems, and other applications. Emphasizes
a rigorous treatment of al and their ef-
ficiency — algorithms for shortest routes, maxi-
mum flows, minimum cost flows, traffic
equilibrium, and network design. Implementa-
tion issues.

T. L. Magnanti, J. B. Orlin

15.083 Combinatorial Optimization

Prereq.: 15.081 or permission of instructor

G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Devoted to a theoretical and rigorous treat-

ment of topics in integer programming and
combinatorial optimization. Topics in com-
binatorial optimization include matching theory,
matroid theory, computational complexity,
design and analysis of heuristics. Topics in in-
teger programming include formulations,
branch and bound, Lagrangean techniques,
cutting plane algorithms, group theoretic ap-
proaches, and Benders’ decomposition.

D. Bertsimas

15.084J Nonlinear Programming

(Same subject as 6.252J)
Prereq.: 18.06, 18.100

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.252J.
J. F. Shapiro, D. P. Bertsekas

15.098 Special Seminar in Applied
Probability and Stochastic Processes

Prereq.: 6.431

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Doctoral student seminar covering current

topics in applied probability and stochastic
processes.
D. Bertsimas, V. Nguyen, L. Wein

15.099 Special Seminar in Operations
Research

Prereq.: 15.081J

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Doctoral student seminar covering current

topics related to operations research not other-
wise included in the curriculum.
T. L. Magnanti

For additional related subjects in Statistics,
see:

Civil and Environmental Engineering: 1.03,
1.151, 1.155, 1.202, 1.203J, 1.205, and 1.732

Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science: 6.041, 6.231, 6.245, 6.262, 6.264J,
6.430J, 6.431, 6.432, and 6.435

Management: 15.034, 15.061, 15.065,
15.070, 15.074, 15.075, 15.076, 15.078,
15.098, 15.306, and 15.832

Mathematics: 18.05, 18.175, 18.177, 18.313,
18.440, 18.441, 18.443, 18.445, 18.446,
18.457, 18.458, 18.465, and 18.466

See also: 2.061, 2.830, 2.870, 5.70, 5.72,
7.02, 8.044, 8.08, 10.816, 11.220, 11.221,
16.322, 17.842, 17.846, 22.38, HST.191, and
MAS.622J.

Health Care Management

15.136J Health Technology

(Same subject as 10.547J, HST.920J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Research seminar in the development, evalua-

tion, and dissemination of medical tech-
nologies and practices. Strategies for
management of basic and applied biomedical
research. Communication channels for re-
search results among researchers and from re-
searchers to users. Analytic methods for
evaluation of efficacy and social impact. Ex-
amines factors influencing commercial develop-
ment of new health technology.

S. N. Finkelstein, C. L. Cooney

15.138J Seminar on Pharmaceutical and

Biotechnology Industry Management

(Same subject as 7.89J, 10.940J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Weekly presentations by guests from phar-

maceutical and biotechnology-related in-
dustries sharing their management problems
with faculty and advanced students in manage-
ment, engineering, and life sciences. Invited
guests describe complex issues they face in
regulatory, finance, R & D, manufacturing, and
other areas. Seminar participants interact to
analyze and offer possible resolutions to the is-
sues presented.

T. J. Allen, C. L. Cooney, S. N. Finkelstein,

A. Sinskey

15.141 Comparative Health Systems

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines major issues facing health systems
in the US and selected other countries from a
variety of perspectives, including those of the
physician, the manager, and the policy
analyst. Considers cost, quality, access, and
technology trade-offs as they affect govern-
ment policy.

S. N. Finkelstein, E. R. Berndt, R. M. Hender-
son

15.149 Special Studies in Health
Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students who desire to do ad-
vanced work or research on a health manage-
ment problem not specifically covered
elsewhere. Readings, conferences, fieldwork,
and reports.

S. N. Finkelstein

International Management

15.215 International Dimensions of
Management

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
2-0-4

Theory and practice of international business,
emphasizing strategy selection, corresponding
organization and managerial roles, in

response to the changing international environ-
ment. Examines some of the distinctive
management problems that arise in internation-
al firms. Restricted to Sloan Fellows.

D. R. Lessard

Descriptions of Subjects 437


--- 05.pdf Page 7 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.219 International Management
Prereq.: 15.010

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Credit cannot also be received for 15.220

15.220 international Management
Prereq.: 15.010

G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Credit cannot also be received for 15.219

Provides the conceptual tools for under-
standing the international competitive environ-
ment and new strategic responses by firms.
Topics include trade and foreign investment
regimes, international product cycles,
geographic clusters, country risk analysis, or-
ganization of multinational enterprises, control
of subsidiaries, strategic alliances, managing
with active states, regional market integration,
and the changing managerial task under condi-
tions of globalization. 15.219 is offered during
the first half of the term, 15.220 during the
second half of the term. Credit not given for
both 15.219 and 15.220.

M. F. Guillén, D. R. Lessard, J. N. Ziegler

15.222 Managing International Enterprises

Prereq.: 15.215 or 15.219 or 15.220
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops strategic, organizational, and
economic concepts guiding the management
of large transnational enterprises, emerging in-
ternational firms, and service-sector multina-
tionals. The emphasis is on the management
of production, sourcing, R&D, market access,
and human resources across borders. Read-
ings and cases are drawn from both
developed and emerging countries.

M. F. Guillén, D. E. Westney

15.223 Governments, Markets, and
International Competition

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.224 Governments, Markets, and
International Competition

Prereq.: 15.215
G (Fall)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides conceptual tools for analyzing how

governments and social institutions influence
industrial competition. Public policies and in-
stitutions that shape competitive outcomes are
examined through cases and analytic readings
on the United States, Europe, Japan, and in-
dustrializing countries. 15.224 is similar to
15.223, but restricted to Sloan fellows.

R. M. Locke, J. N. Ziegler

438 Chapter VIII

15.227-229 Special Seminars
in International Management

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-

dents on current topics related to international
business not otherwise included in curriculum.
Information: D. R. Lessard.

15.231J Politics and Enterprise in Europe

(Same subject as 17.530J)

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines political change and its consequen-

ces for business practice in Europe. National
models explored in light of transnational in-
tegration, regionalization, and fundamental
reform in Eastern Europe. Changes in product
markets as well as supply (labor, capital, tech-
nology, land) assessed by comparing specific
industries in different countries. Alternate
years.

J. N. Ziegler

15.232 The Firm and The Business
Environment in Japan
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines how Japanese firms and their busi-

ness environments have been viewed from
Western management perspectives; the na-
ture of the Japanese business environment
(financial, political, human, technological, so-
cial, and cultural resources); and the internal
organization and strategic processes of
Japanese firms. Intended for Sloan students or
students with background in Japan. Offered
first half term.

D. E. Westney

15.234J Comparative Organization

(Same subject as 17.178J)

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220 or permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides an understanding of comparative,

cross-national patterns of organization, and of
how they relate to national economic, political,
cultural, and institutional characteristics.
Covers the development of the major
paradigms of organization, authority systems,
small-group activities, corporate cultures, politi-
cal activity of large corporations, flexible or-
ganizations, informal-economy activities, and
top management compensation systems in
North America, Europe, and East Asia.

M. F. Guillén

15.235J Institutions for Industrial
Competition in the Advanced World

(Same subject as 17.180J)

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the rule and conventions that shape
industrial competition in the advanced world,
with emphasis on specific instruments for
promoting capabilities and shaping markets.
The traditional concepts of governance are ex-
plored in light of transnational integration,
regional economies, privatization, and the
redefinition of private rights. Changes in gover-
nance assessed by comparing specific in-
dustries in different countries. Alternate years.
J. N. Ziegler

15.236 Business Organization and
Environment: Eastern Europe
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 15.219 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.237 Business Organization and
Environment: China
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 15.219 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.238 Business Organization and
Environment: Australia and New Zealand
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 15.219 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.239 Business Organization and
Environment: South Africa
(New)

Prereq.: 15.219 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.240 Business Organization and
Environment: Latin America
(New)

Prereq.: 15.219 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-1 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

These subjects examine the interaction be-
tween firms and their business environments
in specific regions of the world in comparative
and competitive terms. Issues include political
and economic transformation, changing
strategies of locally-based firms as well as of
multinational firms based elsewhere operating
within the region, and the internal organization
and strategies of both types of firms. Research
paper focusing on issues specific to firms
operating in region required. Offered first half
term.

D. R. Lessard


--- 05.pdf Page 8 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.249 Special Seminar in International
Management
(New)

Prereq.: 15.341, 15.342, or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An advanced seminar in the evolution and key

analytical frameworks of the field of Internation-
al Management, covering the major theoretical
work and approaches to empirical research in
the field and linking these to the core
frameworks of strategy and organization

theory. Restricted to doctoral students. Alter-
nate years.

D. E. Westney

History, Environment, and
Ethics

15.268 Choice Points: Readings on the

Exercise of Power and Responsibility

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies managerial power and responsibility.

Examines conflicts between power and moral
responsibility and the contexts for choice in
dealing with a number of such problems. Read-
ings are principally “classics” used to illustrate
several enduring such issues. Restricted to
Sloan Fellows.

A. J. Siegel

15.269 Literature, Ethics, and Authority

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar in management ethics and problems

of leadership, examining issues of power and
responsibility as questions arise in close study
of classic and modern works of literature.
Topics include: the sources of authority, the
management of consensus, the ideal of voca-
tion, the ethics of lying, the morality of ex-
pediency, the requirements of hierarchy, the
virtues and vices of loyalty, the relevance of
ethical principles in extreme situations. Read-
ings include: Sophocles, Shakespeare, Ibsen,
Shaw, Conrad, Tolstoy, Sat excerpts
from Plato, Machiavelli, Thomas H

Adam Smith; some readings in et
ethics.

A. C. Kibel

Communication

15.279 Management Communication for
Undergraduates

Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9

Seminar designed for Management Science

majors to develop writing and speaking skills
necessary for managers. Students learn com-
munication principles, strategies, and methods
through discussions, exercises, examples, and
cases. A variety of written and oral assign-
ments, in class and in video lab. A major
project yields an original report designed to
satisfy Phase II of the Institute Writing Require-
ment. Priority given to Course 15 seniors and
juniors.

L. Breslow

15.280 Communication for Managers

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
1-1-2

Writing and speaking skills necessary for a

career in management. Students polish com-
munication strategies and methods through
discussion of principles, examples, and cases.
Many written and oral assignments, many
based on material from other subjects.
Restricted to first-year Sloan School of
Management graduate students.

J. Yates, L. Breslow, Staff

15.281 Advanced Managerial
Communication

Prereq.: 15.280 or permission of instructor

G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Builds on managerial communication skills

developed in 15.280. Introduces more interac-
tive oral and interpersonal communication
skills important to managers, including running
and contributing productively to meetings, lis-
tening, and contributing to group decision
making. Includes a written report and a long
oral presentation for a business audience,
generally in conjunction with a project for
another subject.

J. Yates

15.289 Doctoral Seminar: Communication
Skills for Academics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar focuses on the communication skills

needed for a career in academia. Topics in-
clude writing for academic journals, preparing
and delivering conference papers and job
talks, and researching and writing grant
proposals. Also examines the theory and prac-
tice of teaching. Participants are expected to
work on a written project and deliver an oral
presentation based on their current research,
and teach one class for review. Restricted to
doctoral students who have completed their
first year.

L. Breslow

Organization Studies

15.301 Managerial Psychology Laboratory

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, Spring)
2-3-7 Institute LAB

Core subject for students majoring in manage-
ment science. Surveys individual and social
psychology and organization theory inter-
preted in the context of the managerial environ-
ment. Laboratory involves projects of an
applied nature in behavioral science. Em-
phasizes use of behavioral science research
methods to test hypotheses concerning or-
ganizational behavior.

T. J. Allen

15.306 Behavioral Science Research
Methods

(Subject meets with 15.347)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

4-0-8

Introduces methods of behavioral science re-
search. General strategy of behavioral re-
search (quantitative vs qualitative analysis,
hypothesis formulation) and research design
(purposes, variance control, control of ex-
traneous variables, use of control groups, ran-
domized designs, factorial designs). Specific
techniques of various designs (questionnaire
construction, sampling, interviews, systematic
observation). Organization and development
of research project. Meets with graduate sub-
ject 15.347.

J. S. Carroll

15.310 Managerial Psychology

Aisi Se
G (Fall, Spring)
2-0-7

Surveys social psychology and organization
theory interpreted in the context of the
managerial environment. Shares lectures with
15.301, with a separate recitation required.
Equivalent of 15.311 intended primarily for non-
Course XV students.

T. J. Allen

15.311 Organizational Processes

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
4-0-8

Focuses on the organization of the future, iden-
tifies its characteristics, and explores the im-
plications for living in, managing, and leading
such an organization. Also focuses on skills
such as organizational diagnosis, teamwork,
and process analysis. Examines the creation
of the structures, rewards, career paths, and
cultures needed within the firm, and the allian-
ces, learning, and change practices needed to
maintain global performance. Restricted to first-
year Sloan Master's students.

D. G. Ancona, T. A. Kochan, M. A. Scully,

J. Van Maanen

Descriptions of Subjects 439


--- 05.pdf Page 9 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.312 Managerial Decision Making

Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or
permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines individual managerial behavior with

emphasis on cognitive processes in judgment
and choice. Includes judgment under uncer-
tainty, biases and corrective procedures, risk
perception, models of judgment and choice,
decision aids, and problem ich pace techni-
ques.

J. S. Carroll

15.313 Teams in Organizations

Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or
permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Teams are currently in vogue; we see them ap-

pearing at all levels of management for a wide
variety of tasks. Unfortunately, many teams
fail. Subject focuses on the skills and perspec-
tives necessary to make students better
leaders, members, and designers of teams.
Through lectures, discussion, roleplays,
videotaping, group exercises, and written as-
signments, students learn not only the con-
cepts but also how to improve their own
communication and group membership skills.
Topics include negotiation, team decision
making, meeting management, and team
rewards.

D. G. Ancona

15.314 Power and Culture in Organizations

Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or
permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the determinants of political and cul-

tural dynamics in organizations and their ef-
fects on both corporate strategies and the
career prospects of individual managers.
Provides students with the concepts and tools
necessary for diagnosing the rules of the
game and the sources of power in organiza-
tions. Special emphasis on applying the
frameworks and tactics studied in the design
of action plans for organizational and strategic
change.

Information: J. Van Maanen.

15.315 Planning and Managing Change

Prereq.: One subject in organizational
psychology and permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic models and tools used to analyze any

change problem in human systems. Applica-
tion of these models and tools to actual
change projects chosen by members of the
class, to be completed during the subject.
Group as well as individual projects, and week-
ly papers on progress. Models and tools drawn
from organization development theory. Primari-
ly for Master’s students, Sloan Fellows, and
Management of encore students.

E. H. Schein

440 Chapter VIII

15.316 Organizational Leadership and
Change
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 15.794

G (IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Affords a structured debriefing of the LFM

internship experience with a focus on improv-
ing students’ organizational change skills. Ex-
amines the socialization processes students
experienced while in the field and their at-
tempts to exercise leadership within various or-
ganizational cultures. Class format includes
lectures, discussions, case presentations, and
small-group activities exploring internship-
related issues. Individuals and teams submit
written analyses of aspects of the students’
LFM experiences. Restricted to LFM Fellows.
Information: J. S. Carroll.

15.318 Leadership and Change in
Organizations

Prereq.: 15.311 or 15.315 or 15.322 or permis-

sion of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Examines leadership and its role in the change

process. Students learn more about them-
selves as leaders, the concept of leadership
from various theoretical perspectives, and
leadership in today’s organizations. Includes
lectures, discussions, guest speakers, ex-
periential exercises, field trips, and projects.
Grades are based on short papers written
throughout the term.

D. G. Ancona, J. S. Carroll

15.322 Organizational Psychology and
Sociology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes — through lectures, discussions, and

class exercises — the human processes under-
lying organizational behavior. Restricted to
Sloan Fellows.

L. Bailyn

15.328 Special Seminar in Organization
Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

15.329 Special Seminar in Organization

Studies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-

dents on current topics related to organization
studies not otherwise included in curriculum.
Information: J. S. Carroll.

15.341 Individuals, Groups, and
Organizations

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops basic concepts for understanding in-
dividual, group, and organizational behavior
through critical analysis of important works in
the field. Areas covered: cognitive psychology,
behavioral decision making, group process
and performance, and organizational culture
and adaptation. Emphasizes use of behavioral
science concepts for stimulating new and use-
ful behavioral science research. Primarily for
doctoral candidates in the Sloan School of
Management.

D. L. Ancona

15.342J Organizations and Environments

(Same subject as 11.258J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines theory and research on the relation-
ship of organizations to each other and to their
economic, political, and social environments.
Classic and contemporary approaches to com-
plex social systems, the dynamics of inertia
and change, the role of legitimacy, and the
production of change as an intended or unin-
tended consequence. Considers the relative
roles of voluntarism and determinism in the
pursuit of organizational agendas and in the
shaping of organizational environments, for ex-
ample, with respect to changing employment
relationships and environmentalism. Primarily
for doctoral students.

M. A. Scully

15.343 Managing Transformations in Work,
Organizations, and Society
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Managerial issues addressed are associated
with changes and innovations occurring at
three levels of organizational activity: (1) in-
novations in work organization, employee
voice, and dispute resolution at the workplace;
(2) alternative compensation systems, gover-
nance structures, ownership arrangements,
and leadership at the strategic level; and (3)
relations with different groups in society. Guest
speakers and field research — are
prominently featured.

M. A. Scully, T. A. Kochan


--- 05.pdf Page 10 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.345 Doctoral Seminar in Behavioral and
Policy Sciences |

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Credit cannot also be received for 15.346

15.346 Doctoral Seminar in Behavioral and

Policy Sciences Il

Prereq.: 15.345

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

2-0-4 [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Credit cannot also be received for 15.345

A professional seminar for doctoral students to

report on their research, work on their thesis
proposals, and practice their job talks. Also
deals with general professional issues such as
publishing, searching for jobs, the academic
career, etc.

L. Bailyn

15.347 Doctoral Seminar in Research
Methods |

(Subject meets with 15.306)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the process of social research, em-

phasizing the conceptualization of research
choices to maximize validity, relevance, and
discovery. Includes research design (experi-
ments, quasi-experiments, case studies) and
specific measurement techniques (question-
naires, interviews, observation). Meets with un-
dergraduate subject 15.306.

J. S. Carroll

15.348 Doctoral Seminar in Research
Methods II

Prereq.: 15.347 or permission of instructor

G (Fall)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A seminar that deals with the logic of data

analysis and the role of conceptualization in so-
cial science research. Also covers practical,
ethical, and ideological issues in the research
process.

L. Bailyn

Management of Technology
and Innovation

15.351 Introduction to Technological
Innovation Management

Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.311
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Credit cannot also be received for 15.352

15.352 Management of Technological
Innovation

Prereq.: 15.311

G (Spring)

3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Credit cannot also be received for 15.351

Introduction to the sources of technological in-

novation, economics of innovation, protection
of innovation rights, communication of techni-
cal information, capturing benefit from innova-
tion, organizing to manage the innovation
process, cooperation in the innovation
process, new ventures. 15.351 is a full-term
subject with greater detail on technology
strategy and on product development and im-
plementation. 15.352 is a half-term subject.
Students cannot receive credit for both sub-
jects.

15.351: M. J. Tyre, S. Stern

15.352: E. A. von Hippel

15.353 Managing Innovation and
Technological Change

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Successful origination, development, im-
plementation, and diffusion of product and
process innovations in industry. Effective or-
ganization and management of the technologi-
cal change process (marketing, R&D,
engineering, and manufacturing) in new ven-
tures, multidivisional and multinational
enterprises. Restricted to Management of
Technology Program students.

J. M. Utterback

15.355 Managing Technological
Innovation

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Managerial perspectives on development and

consequences of technological innovations in
product and manufacturing process. Issues
relating to managing scientists and engineers
as individuals, in teams, and in large organiza-
tions. Interfaces between R&D function and
marketing and production. Technology plan-
ning and strategy approaches, including new
venture structures for business development

and diversification. Restricted to Sloan Fellows.

Information: E. B. Roberts.

15.361 The Human Side of Technology

Prereq.: —
G (Summer)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines human side of management of
professionals through application of behavioral
science research findings. Topics: supervis-
ing/motivating professional employees; career
orientations; effective conflict management;
group creativity/decision making; managing
product teams; group aging; critical roles for in-
novation; organizational structure/communica-
tion. Emphasizes professional individuals and
groups. Restricted to members of the Manage-
ment of Technology Program.

R. Katz

15.365J Manufacturing/Technology
Interface

(Same subject as 13.685J)

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focus on the management of process innova-
tion. Economic and other influences on
manufacturing process change. Interactions
between research, development, and engineer-
ing activities, and manufacturing operations.
Transfer of new product developments into
manufacturing.

J. M. Utterback

15.369 Corporate Strategies for
Managing Research, Development, and
Engineering

Prereq.: 15.351 or 15.352; permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selected strategic issues in managing re-
search, development, and engineering. Focus
upon linkages between internal and external
sources of technology for major new business
development. Examination of alliances, joint
ventures, acquisitions, and venture capital in-
vestments as alternative approaches. Outside
speakers supplement faculty lectures. Inde-
pendent study and preparation of student term
reports.

Information: E. B. Roberts.

15.370 Strategic Management for
Technology Managers

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces basic concepts, frameworks, and
methodologies useful to managers formulating
and implementing both business unit and cor-
porate level strategy. Most of the same
material covered as in 15.930, but with some
special readings and exercises that focus on
technology-driven industries and companies.
Class discussion focuses on case studies, but
also uses readings, an occasional lecture, and
videos. Restricted to students in the Manage-
ment of Technology Program.

M. A. Cusumano

Descriptions of Subjects 441


--- 05.pdf Page 11 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.375 New Enterprises

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-1-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers the process of conceptualizing, plan-

ning, and starting a new enterprise. Topics in-
clude the entrepreneur, the business
opportunity, legal issues, entrepreneurial
ethics, the business plan, the founding team,
and seeking funds. Each student develops a
detailed business plan for a start-up.
Information: E. A. von Hippel. .

15.377 R&D Process: Communications and
Organization

Prereq.: 15.301 or 15.310 or 15.311 or 15.361

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A review of research, beginning with reward

systems for and motivation of engineers and
scientists in industry. Deals with a number of
diverse subjects, ranging from the aging of
technical groups to the management of R&D
matrix organizations and the architecture of
R&D labs. Meets first half of semester.

T. J. Allen

15.378J Dynamic Strategic Planning

(Same subject as TPP.23J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)

3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Restricted to students in the Management of

Technology program. See description under
subject TPP.23J.
R. de Neutville, J. P. Clark, F. Field

15.379 Seminar in Management of
Technology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
3-0-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Current practices and issues in the strategic

Management of Technology are analyzed and
discussed by leaders from industry and govern-
ment. Examines different approaches to
managing the technology function within a
broad organizational context, in seminar dis-
cussions and in the field. Restricted to
Management of Technology Program stu-
dents. Seminar continues into Fall term and
through Spring term.

R. Weichman

See also 15.136J, 15.138J.

Finance

15.410 Financial Management!
Prereq.: 15.515

G (Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides students with the financial tools they

need for non-financial management positions.
Topics include: identification of financing
needs; capital structure; capital budgeting;
company valuation. Lectures and case applica-
tions with an emphasis on the latter. Primarily
intended for graduate students in Sloan

School of Management. Open to others with
permission of instructor.

D. Scharfstein

15.411 Financial Management
Prereq.: 15.511, 15.024, 15.063
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Primarily concerned with corporate finance. Ad-

dresses the three basic functions of a chief
financial officer: how to make good financing
decisions, how to make good investment
decisions, and how to forecast the cash needs
of the firm. Topics include: capital budgeting,
capital structure, the firm's cost of capital,
financial instruments available in the capital
market, dividend policy, mergers, and the inter-
action between a firm’s product market and
financial goals. Restricted to Sloan Fellows.
Information: D. Scharfstein.

15.412 Financial Management Il

Prereq.: 15.501

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys and analyzes financial problems

facing managers, including theoretical introduc-
tion to financial institutions, financial instru-
ments, and capital markets. Topics: functions
and operations of capital markets, theory of ef-
ficient markets, portfolio and valuation theory,
capital budgeting and investment decision
making, firm's cost of capital, long-term financ-
ing instruments and financing decisions,
dividend policy and capital structure. Primarily
for students not concentrating in finance.
Information: D. Scharfstein.

15.414 Financial Management
Prereq.: 15.012, 15.515

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Investment theory, with special emphasis on

the impact of financial decisions on technology
strategy. Operation of financial markets and in-
stitutions. Restricted to Management of Tech-
nology students.

Information: D. Scharfstein.

15.415 Finance Theory

Prereq.: 14.01 or 15.011, 15.501 or 15.515
G (Fall, Spring)
6-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Core theory of capital markets and corporate
finance. Topics: functions and operations of
capital markets, analysis of consumption-
investment decisions of investors, diversifica-
tion and portfolio selection, valuation theory
and equilibrium pricing of risky assets, theory
of efficient markets, and investment and financ-
ing decisions of firms. Theoretical foundation
for further study and practical applications. Re-
quired for Finance electives, and for Financial
Management and Financial Engineering
tracks. If the subject is oversubscribed, priority
is given to Course 15 students.

S. C. Myers

15.416J Introduction to Financial
Economics

(Same subject as 14.416J)
Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122

G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Foundations of modern financial economics;
individuals’ consumption and portfolio
decisions under uncertainty; valuation of finan-
cial securities. Topics include: expected utility
theory; stochastic dominance; mutual fund
separation, portfolio frontiers; capital asset pric-
ing model; arbitrage pricing theory; Arrow-
Debreu economies; dynamic consumption and
portfolio decisions; dynamic spanning; options;
market imperfections; rational expectations;
financial signaling. Introduction to continuous-
time finance. Primarily for doctoral students in
accounting, economics, and finance.

J. Wang

15.426J Real Estate Finance and
Investment

(Same subject as 11.431J)
Prereq.: 11.447

G (Fall)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.431J.
T. Riddiough

15.427J Real Estate Capital Markets

(Same subject as 11.432J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.432J.
T. Riddiough

15.432 Capital Markets and Financial
Institutions

Prereq.: 15.415

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Role and functioning of the capital markets
and financial intermediaries for the channeling
of investable funds, the allocation of resour-
ces, the reallocation of risk, and the auditing of
performance. Function of financial inter-
mediaries operating in world financial markets.
F. Modigliani

442 Chapter VIII


--- 05.pdf Page 12 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.433 Investments

Prereq.: 15.415 and permission of instructor

G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Empirical techniques used most often in the

quantitative analysis of financial markets, and
their applications to actual data from various
markets. Includes applications of the
CAPM/APT, the Black-Scholes/Merton option
pricing models, performance evaluation,
portfolio management, risk management, and
non-standard financial analysis (technical
analysis, neural networks, etc.). Some
rudimentary computer skills required. In the
event the subject is oversubscribed, priority is
given to Course 15 students.

A. W. Lo

15.434 Corporate Finance |
Prereq.: 15.415

G (Fall)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and practice of corporate investment

and financing decisions. Approaches to es-
timating risk and adjusting for it. Applications
of option pricing and new approaches to valua-
tion. Capital structure policy, and the conse-
quences of asymmetric information and
incentive problems.

D. Scharfstein

15.435 Corporate Finance ll
Prereq.: 15.434

G (Fall)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced topics in corporate finance: security

design; restructuring; bankruptcy; risk manage-
ment; corporate control and governance is-
sues.

D. Scharfstein

15.436 International Financial Markets

Prereq.: 15.012, 15.415

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of financial markets and instruments

in context of globalization. Currency market;
exchange rate determination; statistical proper-
ties of exchange rates. Currency futures and
options. Hedging foreign exchange risk and
managing foreign exchange exposure. Euro-
currency market and related derivatives
market. International bond market, swap
market, and equity market. Asset allocation
and asset pricing in face of volatile real ex-
change rates. International portfolio manage-
ment and performance measurement.
Information: D. Scharfstein.

15.437 Options and Futures Markets

Prereq.: 15.415
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Develops option pricing theory. Applies theory

to valuation of put and call options, loan
guarantees, and corporate liabilities. Empirical
tests of the models and investment strategies.
Futures markets, emphasizing financial futures
and their uses. If subject is oversubscribed,
priority is given to Course 15 students.
Information: S. C. Myers.

15.438 Investment Banking and Markets

Prereq.: 15.415
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys the investment banking industry and

the financial markets and intermediaries dealt
with by the industry. Description of trading and
hedging techniques. Analysis of new financial
innovations and analytical techniques. If sub-
ject is oversubscribed, priority is given to
Course 15 students.

Information: D. Scharfstein.

15.439 International Corporate Finance

Prereq.: 15.415
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Theory and practice of investment, financing,

contracting, and risk management decisions of
firms operating internationally, with emphasis
on interactions of financial considerations with
operating strategy and tactics. Implications of
fluctuating exchange rates, differing fiscal
regimes, distorted and segmented capital
markets, and cross-border risks for corporate
decisions.

D. R. Lessard

15.440J Advanced Financial
Economics |

(Same subject as 14.440J)
Prereq.: 15.416J

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers advanced topics in the theory of finan-

cial markets with a focus on continuous time
models. Topics include multiperiod securities
markets and martingales; pricing of contingent
securities such as options; optimal consump-
tion and portfolio problems of an individual;
dynamic equilibrium theory and the Intertem-
poral Capital Asset Pricing Model; and term
structure of interest rates. This subject is
primarily for doctoral students in accounting,
economics, and finance.

Information: D. Scharfstein.

15.441J Advanced Financial
Economics Il

(Same subject as 14.441J)
Prereq.: 14.121, 14.122, or 15.416J
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Surveys selected topics in current advanced re-
search in corporate finance. Theoretical and
empirical analyses of corporate financing and
investment decisions. Some background in in-
formation economics and save theory is use-
ful. Primarily for doctoral students in
accounting, economics, and finance.

D. Gromb

15.442J Advanced Financial
Economics Ill

(Same subject as 14.442J)

Prereq.: 14.382, 15.415, 15.416J, and permis-
sion of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Recent empirical methods in finance, includ-
ing: the estimation and testing of market ef-
ficiency, the random walk hypothesis, the
CAPM/APT, various term structure models, op-
tion pricing theories, and market microstruc-
tures; performance evaluation; bond rating and
default analysis; event study methodology;
continuous-time econometrics; and general
time series methods. An empirical term project
is required. Some econometric background
and rudimentary computer programming skills
are assumed. Primarily for doctoral students in
accounting, economics, and finance.

A. W. Lo

15.448-15.449 Special Seminar in Finance

Prereq.: 15.410 or 15.412 or 15.415
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-
dents on current topics related to finance not
otherwise included in curriculum.

D. Scharfstein

15.450 Analytics of Financial Engineering

Prereq.: 15.415, 15.437
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mathematical, statistical, and computational
methods used most often in quantitative finan-
cial analysis, including: the Ito calculus, estima-
tion of stochastic processes, Monte Carlo
simulation, numerical solutions of derivative
pricing formulas, and advanced time series
analysis. Lectures cover methods, and finan-
cial applications are developed in intensive
computer-oriented problem sets. Restricted to
Sloan Master’s students electing the Financial
Engineering track.

Information: D. Scharfstein.

Descriptions of Subjects 443


--- 05.pdf Page 13 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.451 Proseminar in Financial Engineering
(New)

Prereq.: 15.415 or 15.412

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar provides students a unique oppor-

tunity to tackle original research problems in
financial engineering that have been posed by
leading industry experts from the financial com-
munity. These experts — partners of com-
panies, managing directors etc. — provide
students with current problems in financial en-
gineering that they are currently facing in their
businesses, with the restriction that the
problems must be as yet unsolved. Students
are assigned to teams and each team is as-
signed one such problem. The team’s solution
is then presented at a seminar open to the en-
tire MIT community.

A. W. Lo

15.452 Proseminar in Financial Management
(New)

Prereq.: 15.415 or 15.412

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

The proseminar has two principal goals: to

bridge the gap between finance theory and
finance practice; and to introduce students to
the broader financial community. Both are ac-
complished by student participation in a series
of proseminars with guest speakers from in-
dustry. Each guest, in collaboration with
finance faculty, provides a problem and
materials to a team of students. Each team
then prepares a report and presents their
analysis to the guest speaker and other stu-
dents for evaluation and feedback.

D. Scharfstein

Accounting

15.501 Introduction to Financial and
Managerial Accounting

(Subject meets with 15.516)
Prereq.: 14.01 or equivalent
U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6

Studies basic concepts of financial and
managerial reporting. Viewpoint is that of
readers of financial and managerial reports
rather than the accountants who prepare
them. Meets with subject 15.516. If subject is
oversubscribed, priority is given to Course 15
students. Not open to freshmen.

D. O. May

15.511 Financial and Management
Accounting

Prereq.: —
G (Summer)
3-0-6

Studies basic concepts of financial and
managerial accounting. Viewpoint is that of the
users of accounting information (especially
managers) rather than the preparer (the ac-
countant). Restricted to Sloan Fellows.
Information: P. Healy.

15.512 Managerial and Financial Accounting
(New)

Prereq.: —

G (Summer)

3-0-6

As users of accounting information, technology

managers must also understand the underly-
ing concepts regarding the preparation and im-
plications of the information being used. This is
examined, as well as the ways in which ac-
counting information can be useful to
managers in decision making and control
within the organization. Restricted to Manage-
ment of Technology students.

R. W. Olive

15.515 Financial and Managerial Accounting

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Summer)
4-0-8

An intensive introduction to the preparation

and interpretation of financial information for in-
vestors (external users) and managers (inter-
nal users). Adopts a decision-maker
perspective of accounting by emphasizing the
relation between accounting data and the un-
derlying economic events that generated

them. Assignments include textbook problems,
analysis of financial statements, and cases.
Restricted to first-year Sloan Master's students.
D. O. May, E. A. Echer, G. P. Wilson

15.516 Introduction to Financial and
Managerial Accounting

(Subject meets with 15.501)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 (H except XV)

Studies basic concepts of financial and
managerial reporting. Viewpoint is that of
readers of financial and managerial reports
rather than the accountants who prepare
them. Meets with subject 15.501. If subject is
over subscribed, priority is given to Course 15
students. See description under subject
15.501.

D. O. May

15.521 Management Accounting and
Control

Prereq.: 15.501 or 15.511 or 15.515 or 15.516
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines management accounting and re-
lated analytical methodologies for decision
making and control in profit-directed organiza-
tions. Product costing, budgetary control sys-
tems, and performance evaluation systems for
planning, coordinating, and monitoring the per-
formance of a business. Defines principles of
measurement and develops framework for as-
sessing behavioral dimensions of control sys-
tems; impact of different managerial styles on
motivation and performance in an organization.
Information: P. Healy.

15.535 Business Analysis Using Financial
Statements

Prereq.: 15.501 or 15.511 or 15.515 or 15.516;
15.410 or 15.411 or 15.414 or 15.415

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Uses a case approach to develop a framework
for business analysis. Provides students with
tools for business analysis, including strategic,
accounting, financial, and prospective
analysis. Concepts are then applied to a num-
ber of decision-making contexts, such as credit
analysis, investor communications, merger
analysis, financial policy decisions, and
securities analysis.

P. Healy

15.539 Doctoral Seminar in Accounting

Prereq.: 15.515

G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Designed primarily for doctoral students in ac-
counting and related fields. The reading list
consists of accounting research papers. The
objective of the course is to introduce research
topics, methodologies, and developments in
accounting.

P. Healy

15.545 Mergers and Acquisitions: The
Market for Corporate Control

Prereq.: 15.411 or 15.412 or 15.414 or 15.415;
15.511 or 15.515 or 15.516

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Probably the most dramatic events in a
corporation's history involve the decision to ac-
quire another firm or the decision to oppose
being acquired. This is also one of the areas of
management most thoroughly documented in
the financial press and the academic literature.
This subject explores three aspects of the
merger and acquisition process: the strategic
decision to acquire, the valuation decision of
how much to pay, and the financing decision
on how to fund the acquisition. Class sessions
alternate between discussions of academic
readings and applied cases.

Information: P. Healy.

444 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 14 ---
School of Management Course 15

Information Technologies

15.561 Information Systems: From
Technology Infrastructure to the Networked
Corporation

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamental principles for the effective use of
computer-based information systems (IS).
Focuses on the strategic and organizational im-
plications of the key technologies. Topics:
trends in core technologies; the coalescing in-
dustries of computers, communications, infor-
mation services, electronics, and media; the
current state of the art in IS design; using |S to
support work and gain competitive advantage;
reinventing business processes for the next
decade; evaluating and managing advanced in-
formation technologies; the networked corpora-
tion. Primarily for Sloan Master's students.

S. E. Madnick, W. J. Orlikowski, E. Brynjolfsson

15.563 Inventing the Organizations of the
21st Century

Prereq.: 15.561 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on alternative ways work may be or-
ganized in the future. Special emphasis on
how new computer and communications tech-
nologies, along with new views of human na-
ture, may enable new organizational forms to
emerge. Topics include: examples of new or-
ganizational forms (such as networked or-
ganizations, “adhocracies,” virtual
corporations, and electronic markets), new
technologies (such as computer-supported
cooperative work, groupware, and EDI), and
new concepts for organizational design (such
as reengineering and business process
analysis).

T. W. Malone

15.564 Information Technology |

Prereq.: 15.561 or permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Broad coverage of technology concepts under-
lying modern computing and information
management. Topics include computer ar-
chitecture and operating systems, information
retrieval techniques, graphical user interfaces,
networks, groupware, and cryptography.
Hands-on exposure to Internet services, SQL
database language, PowerBuilder graphical in-
terface language, and Lotus Notes.
Information: S. E. Madnick.

15.565 Information Technology II:
Dynamics of the IT Industry

Prereq.: 15.564 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides broad coverage of current trends and
perspectives of the Information Technology
(IT) industry, with an emphasis on modern
database technology. Presents basic prin-
ciples of database technology and framework
for integrating concepts essential to the under-
standing of the IT industry dynamics. Students
develop a sensitivity to the critical issues
facing the computer industry and emerging
trends. Topics are substantiated by speakers
such as prominent scholars, IT vendors, and
chief information officers.

Information: S. E. Madnick.

15.566 Information Technology as an
Integrating Force in Manufacturing

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the key role that information tech-

nology plays in enabling organizational change
and integration, especialy in manufacturing.
Taught in a seminar format with presentations
by faculty, students, and company repre-
sentatives. Topics: 1) core technologies, includ-
ing computer hardware architectures, software
design principles, communications, and net-
works; 2) applications such as flexible
manufacturing, CAD/CAM, and knowledge-
based systems; 3) intra- and inter-organization-
al issues, such as business process redesign,
networked organizations, and supply chain
management. Offered jointly with LFM pro-
gram.

E. Brynjolfsson

15.568 Management Information Systems

Prereq.: 15.561 or equivalent
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concepts, frameworks, tools, techniques, and

processes that assist management in its inter-
action with and direction of computer-based in-
formation systems today. Emphasis on
reengineering of information flows to meet the
needs of both control and empowerment in the
era of the global information infrastructure and
networked organizations. Emphasizes
managerial point of view and organizational is-
sues involved in managing a firm's information
resources.

J. F. Rockart

15.574 Theoretical Foundations for
Information Technology

Prereq.: 15.561 or programming experience
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents a theoretical background for many im-
portant topics in information technology such
as efficiency of algorithms, computer perfor-
mance evaluation, computer communications,
parallel processing, and database manage-
ment systems. Theoretical foundations are
drawn from areas such as combinatorics,
queuing theory, concurrency control, theorem
proving, and Petri nets. Primarily for doctoral
students. Offered every third year.
Information: S. E. Madnick.

15.575 Research Seminar in Information
Technology and Organizations: Economic
Perspectives

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Builds upon relevant economic theories and
methodologies to analyze the changes
enabled by information technology within and
between organizations. Typical perspectives
examined include principal-agent theory and in-
Stitutional economics, industrial organization,
strategic frameworks, intellectual property,
productivity assessment, and technology dif-
fusion. Extensive reading and discussion of re-
search literature aimed at exploring the
application of these theories and illustrating al-
ternative research methods used in their
development and testing. Primarily for doctoral
students. Offered every third year.

E. Brynjolfsson

15.576 Research Seminar in Information
Technology and Organizations: Social
Perspectives

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the assumptions, concepts,
theories, and methodologies that inform re-
search into the behavioral aspects of informa-
tion technology. Extensive reading and
discussion of research literature aimed at ex-
ploring micro, group, and macro level social
phenomena surrounding the development, im-
plementation, use and implications of informa-
tion technology in organizations. Primarily for
doctoral students. Alternate years.

W. J. Orlikowski

Descriptions of Subjects 445


--- 05.pdf Page 15 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.577 Software Engineering
Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on managing and improving the

delivery of software in organizations, especial-
ly the management of projects that have been
described as “programming-in-the-large.”
Through case studies, students are exposed
to the tools and techniques used on commer-
cial systems, and present research results on
the state of the art in how best to manage
these projects. Subject places particular em-
phasis on measurement tools for effective
managerial planning and control.

Information: S. E. Madnick.

15.578 Communications and Connectivity
Among Information Systems

Prereq.: 15.561 or equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores critical issues of communications and

connectivity among information systems from
strategic, organizational, and technical
perspectives. Strategic connectivity: competi-
tive forces, interlinked value chains, motivating
strategic alliances. Physical connectivity:
software, hardware, protocols of local-area

and wide-area communications networks. Logi-
cal connectivity: distributed databases, object-
oriented systems, semantic reconciliation.
Organizational connectivity: loosely coupled or-
ganizations, development of standards.

S. E. Madnick

15.579-15.580 Special Seminar in
Information Technology

Prereq.: 15.561 or 15.564

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-

dents on current topics related to information
technology not otherwise included in cur-
riculum.

S. E. Madnick, T. W. Malone

15.581 Information Systems and Law

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines interlocking technological and legal

issues that arise in the operation of computer-
based information systems in society. Em-
phasizes, in class discussions and in term
projects, interdisciplinary definition, analysis,
and solution of specific problems. Continuing
effort toward improving and integrating techni-
cal, social, and legal concepts of information.
Topics: protection of personal privacy,
proprietary rights in software, computer crime,
computer ethics. No listeners. Alternate years.
J. A. Meldman

15.582J Information and Communications:
Technology and Policy

(Same subject as TPP.71J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject TPP.71J.

L. McKnight

15.599 Workshop in Information Technology

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Presentations by faculty, doctoral students,

and guest speakers of ongoing research relat-
ing to current issues in information technology,
as well as discussions of key research papers
in the field. Specific topics determined by the
interest of participants and by new and impor-
tant directions in information technology. Back-
ground readings and active participation by
students expected. Primarily for doctoral stu-
dents.

E. Brynjolfsson

Law

15.601 The American Legal System

(Subject meets with 15.611)

Prereq.: 14.01 or 14.02 or equivalent
U (Fall)

3-0-6 HASS

15.611 The American Legal System

(Subject meets with 15.601)

Prereq.: 14.01 or 14.02 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General intensive introduction to law and the

American legal system. Analyzes components
and operation of the legal process in context of
specific legal problems. Examines judicial
reasoning and development of legal doctrine.
Topics: torts, contracts, criminal and constitu-
tional law, trial procedure and evidence, ad-
ministrative law, scope of the judicial process,
and the relationships between state and
Federal law. Extensive reading of case law.
Participation in class discussion required. No
listeners.

J. A. Meldman

15.615 The Manager’s Legal Function

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides a basic understanding of legal issues
that corporations meet during their existence.
Follows one firm throughout its life — from
birth to bankruptcy, first as a breakaway from
an established high-tech firm, then proceeding
through initial funding efforts, establishment of
its capital and corporate structure, and through
problems in labor, trade secrets, contracts and
antitrust, product liability, and resolution of
transnational and domestic business disputes.
J. D. Nyhart

15.635 Law and International Business

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A management-oriented understanding of inter-
national business from a legal perspective. Em-
phasis on East Asia, Europe, and the US. The
international, regional, and national law
frameworks of: trade regulation and import
competition; transnational contracts and cor-
porations; responsibility to employees, con-
sumers and the environment; regulation of
competition and collaboration; intellectual
property and licensing; and law-sensitive trans-
actions such as joint R&D, M&A, financial ser-
vices, and privatization.

J. Akula

15.645 Government and the Management of
Technology

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The changing role of government in shaping
and directing the management of technology
in the civilian sector of the economy. Principal
themes: rationales, processes, and
mechanisms of government involvement;
promotion and regulation of technological
development and use by government; and in-
dustrial policy in the US and other countries. |l-
lustrative case studies: protection of individual
property, R&D policy, environmental regula-
tion, administrative law.

J. D. Nyhart

15.647-—15.649 Special Seminar in Law

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring) !

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-
dents on current topics related to law not other-
wise included in curriculum.

J. D. Nyhart

15.655J Law, Technology, and Public
Policy

(Same subject as TPP.32J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject TPP.32J.
N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart

15.656J Technology, Law, and the Working
Environment

(Same subject as 10.805J, TPP.35J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 10.805J.
N. A. Ashford, C. C. Caldart

446 Chapter Viil


--- 05.pdf Page 16 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.657J Sustainability, Trade, and the
Environment
(New)

(Same subject as TPP.37J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-6

With the recent passing of the North American

Free Trade Agreement and the establishment
of the World Trade Organization, serious ques-
tions have been raised concerning the effects
of global trade on sustainability, which includes
not only a healthy economic base, but also a
sound environment, stable employment, ade-
quate purchasing power, distributional equity,
national self-reliance, and maintenance of cul-
tural integrity. Subject explores the many
dimensions of sustainability and the use of
political and legal mechanisms to further sus-
tainable development.

N. A. Ashford

15.658J Legal Issues in the Development
Process

(Same subject as 11.340J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.340J.
L. Bacow

See also 15.581.

Industrial Relations and
Human Resource
Management

15.660 Industrial Relations and Human
Resource Management

Prereq.: 15.311
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.662 Industrial Relations and Human

Resource Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Widespread restructuring has forced firms to

rethink relationships with employees. Subject
introduces general managers to the new
human resource challenges they are likely to
confront. Topics include: compensation sys-
tems; high-performance human resource sys-
tems; training programs; negotiation strategy
and tactics; downsizing; equal employment op-
portunity laws; workforce diversity and union-
management relationships. 15.662 restricted
to Sloan Fellows.

P. Osterman, J. B. Rebitzer

15.664 Management of Human
Resources

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers various topics in labor economics and

human resources. Topics include career pat-
terns in organizations, public employment
policy, impact of technical change, discrimina-
tion and affirmative action, wage determina-
tion, training policy, and unionization.

P. Osterman

15.665 Power and Negotiation

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides understanding of the theory and

processes of negotiation as practiced in a
variety of settings. Designed for relevance to
the broad spectrum of bargaining problems
faced by the manager and professional. Allows
students opportunity to develop negotiation
skills experientially and to understand negotia-
tion in useful analytical frameworks. Em-
phasizes simulations, exercises, role playing,
and cases.

R. B. McKersie

15.666 Negotiation and Conflict
Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores theory and processes of negotiation
within an employment context with special em-
phasis on sources of power in negotiation.
Covers conflict management as a first party
and as a third party (third-party skills include
helping others deal directly with their conflicts,
mediation, investigation, arbitration, helping
the system itself to change as a result of a dis-
pute). Special cases: abrasiveness, dangerous-
ness, meanness, whistleblowing, ethics.
Simulations of difficult situations: hiring, firing,
drug use, etc.

M. P. Rowe

15.671J Labor Economics |

(Same subject as 14.671J)
Prereq.: 14.64 or 15.660

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 14.671J.
M. Piore

15.672) Labor Economics Il

(Same subject as 14.672J)
Prereq.: 14.04

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 14.672J.
J. Angrist, S. Pischke

15.674J Managing People and
Organizations in a Changing World
Economy

(Same subject as 14.674J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The new terms of international competition
and technological innovation have provoked a
redefinition of and renewed interest in the
management of human resources. As in-
dividual firms and entire industries struggle to
adjust to changing world markets, the manage-
ment of people (as individuals and/or in
groups) has come to play an increasingly
central role in developing and implementing
successful competitive strategies. Examines
the role human resources play in the develop-
ment of new products, the reorganization of
production, and the implementation of interna-
tional strategies in a variety of different nation-
al and industrial contexts

Consult R. M. Locke.

15.676 Industrial Relations Theory and
Research Seminar

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Historical evolution and assessment of re-
search in industrial relations. Introduces doc-
toral students to the field and explores where
their research interests fit within the broader
field. First part compares the normative as-
sumptions, theories, and methodologies used
by economists, historians, sociologists,
psychologists, and legal scholars from the lat-
ter nineteenth century to the present. Final por-
tion explores strategies for advancing research
on topics of current interest to participants.

T. A. Kochan

15.677J Public Policy and Human
Resources

(Same subject as 11.427J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers topics such as public and private train-
ing policy, anti-poverty programs, the relation-
ship between federal and state labor policy
and the organization of work within firms,
public policy and the transformation of in-
dustrial relations, and family issues and other
benefit policies within firms.

P. Osterman

15.678J Political Economy |: Theories of
the State and the Economy

(Same subject as 17.156J, 14.781J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 17.156J.
M. Piore, S. Berger

Descriptions of Subjects 447


--- 05.pdf Page 17 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.691J Research Seminar in Industrial
Relations

(Same subject as 14.691J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

15.692J Research Seminar in Industrial

Relations

(Same subject as 14.692J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discusses important areas for research in in-

dustrial relations; frameworks for research, re-
search techniques, and methodological
problems. Centered mainly on staff research
and the thesis research of advanced graduate
students and invited guests.

Information: T. A. Kochan.

15.698 Special Seminar in industrial
Relations and Human Resource
Management

Prereq.: Doctoral students or permission of in-

structor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-

dents on current topics related to industrial
relations and human resource management
not otherwise included in curriculum.

T. A. Kochan

15.699 Special Seminar in Industrial
Performance

Prereq.: 15.660 or 15.662

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Seminar examines current and in-process re-

search on determinants of firm and industry
performance from a multi-disciplinary perspec-
tive. Alternative conceptions of the role of cor-
porations and their governance structures are
analyzed and the results of ongoing studies of
the competitiveness of US industries are dis-
cussed. Also serves as a workshop for Ph.D.
students working under the sponsorship of the
MIT Industrial Performance Center.

T. A. Kochan

Operations Management

15.760 Introduction to Operations
Management

Prereq.: 15.060
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

15.761 Operations Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces students to problems and analysis

related to the design, planning, control, and im-
provement of manufacturing and service opera-
tions. Includes process analysis, project
analysis, materials management, production
planning and scheduling, quality management,
computer-aided manufacturing technologies,
design for manufacturing, capacity and
facilities planning, and operations strategy.
15.760 primarily for graduate students in Sloan
School of Management. Course 15 under-
graduates must have 6.041, 15.053, and
15.501 as prerequisites.

S. D. Eppinger, L. M. Wein

15.762 Operations Management Models
and Applications

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or permission of in-

structor
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Builds upon concepts developed in 15.760 and

15.761. Focuses on models and techniques
that operations managers use to diagnose and
evaluate operational performance, and make
short-term and long-term decisions. Intro-
duces, through lectures, computer exercises,
and case discussions, various descriptive and
decision-support models and methods for in-
ventory management, production planning and
scheduling, supply chain optimization, capacity
planning, manufacturing systems design.
Strongly recommended for Operations
Management concentrators.

S. C. Graves

15.763 The Practice of Operations
Management

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides an opportunity to apply problem-solv-

ing methods to practice through operations im-
provement and planning projects in local
manufacturing and service organizations.
Team projects provide experience in defining,
diagnosing, and analyzing complex problems,
and developing effective solutions. Case
analyses and class discussions focus on the
process and tools for operations improvement.
Strongly recommended for operations manage-
ment concentrators.

G. R. Bitran, D. B. Rosenfield

15.764 The Theory of Operations
Management

Prereq.: 15.081 or 6.251J, 6.431, 15.760 or
15.761

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focus on theoretical work for studying opera-
tions planning and control problems. Topics
vary from year to year, and will include inven-
tory theory, sequencing theory, aggregate
production planning, production scheduling,
multistage production/distribution systems, per-
formance evaluation, and flexible manufactur-

ing systems.
L. M. Wein

15.766 Total Quality Management

Prereq.: 6.431 or 6.430/
G (Summer)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Teaches broad management skills and con-
cepts for total quality management, an ap-
proach to quality encompassing management
strategy, outlook, commitment, and methods
applicable in any culture. Encompasses tools
and approaches for quality management, prob-
lem-solving, and improvement activities
through lectures, readings, applications (includ-
ing written reports), and participation ina
workshop.

S. Shiba

15.768 Managing Services: Concepts,
Design, and Delivery

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the difference between service and
manufacturing operations, and the degree of
distinct management skills and tools required.
Analyzes cases selected from a variety of ser-
vice operations. Guest speakers from specific
service industries discuss the essence of
managing those operations.

G. R. Bitran

15.769 Manufacturing Policy

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or permission of
instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides framework for analyzing strategic is-
sues in manufacturing. Analyzes relationships
between manufacturing managers and their
suppliers, customers, competitors, senior
management, and hourly workers. Also covers
the interface between manufacturing and
marketing, engineering, quality, purchasing,
finance, and accounting. Devotes a moderate
amount of time to international manufacturing
competition.

G. R. Bitran, J. Klein, D. B. Rosenfield

15.770J Transportation and Logistics
Analysis

(Same subject as 1.208J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.208J.
Y. Sheffi

448 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 18 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.771J Case Studies in Logistics and
Supply Chain Management

(Same subject as 1.209J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-6

See description under subject 1.209J.
Y. Sheffi

15.778 Managing Services: Concepts,
Design, and Delivery

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the difference between service and

manufacturing operations, and the degree of
distinct management skills and tools required.
Analyzes cases selected from a variety of ser-
vice operations. Guest speakers from specific
service industries discuss the essence of
managing those operations. Restricted to
Sloan Fellows and Management of Technol-
ogy students.

G. R. Bitran

15.779 Manufacturing Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Summer)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides framework for analyzing strategic is-

sues in manufacturing. Analyzes relationships
between manufacturing managers and their
suppliers, customers, competitors, superiors,
and hourly workers. Also covers the interface
between manufacturing and marketing, en-
gineering, quality, purchasing, finance, and ac-
counting. Devotes a moderate amount of time
to international manufacturing competition.
Restricted to Sloan Fellows and Management
of Technology programs.

G. R. Bitran

15.783J Product Design and Development

(Same subject as 2.739J)

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761 or 2.731 or 2.73 or
permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers modern tools and methods for product

design and development. The cornerstone is a
project in which teams of management, en-
gineering, and industrial design students con-
ceive, design, and prototype a physical
product. Class sessions are conducted in
workshop mode and employ cases and hands-
on exercises to reinforce the key ideas. Topics
include identifying customer needs, concept
generation, product architecture, industrial
design, and design-for-manufacturing.

S. D. Eppinger, D. E. Westney

15.792J Proseminar in Manufacturing

(Same subject as 2.890J, 3.80J, 10.792u,

16.985J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Provides an integrative forum for LFM stu-

dents and is the focus for projects in leader-
ship, service, and improvement. The seminar
covers a set of integrative manufacturing
topics or issues such as leadership and related
topics, and includes presentations by guest
speakers. During the Spring term, students
use the seminar to help prepare for intern-
ships. The seminar is largely managed by stu-
dents. Primarily for LFM Fellows.

D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll

15.794 Research Project in
Manufacturing

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

A special projects subject designed for
Leaders for Manufacturing (LFM) students in
conjunction with on-site projects at LFM
partner companies. Student teams work on
faculty-supervised thesis research projects
that deal with a specific aspect of manufactur-
ing. Students are also required to summarize
their work in the context of understanding or-
ganization, leadership, teamwork, and task
management in conjunction with 15.316.

D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll

15.795 Seminar in Operations
Management

Prereq.: 15.760 or 15.761

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics vary from year to year. Typical ex-

amples from past years: manufacturing
strategy, technology supply chains.
C. H. Fine

15.799 Workshop in Operations
Management

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Presentations by faculty, doctoral students,

and guest speakers of ongoing research relat-
ing to current issues in operations manage-
ment, including reports of research projects
(proposed or in progress) and informal discus-
sions of recent literature dealing with subjects
of special interest to participants. Primarily for
doctoral students.

Information: C. H. Fine, L. M. Wein.

Marketing

15.810 Introduction to Marketing

Prereq.: Completion of Sloan Master's Core
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces a customer orientation and its im-
plications for the enterprise. How to listen to
the customer and how to translate what is
learned into product design. How to see a sell-
ing process from the customer's perspective
and how to evaluate alternative technologies
for communication and delivery. Lectures and
cases. Class meets three times per week for
half the term. Restricted to graduate students
in the Sloan School of Management. Others
please note 15.812.

B. Wernertelt

15.811 Marketing Management

Prereq.: 15.063 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An examination of the key concepts and
processes of marketing, from the perspective
of the general manager. Customer analysis (in-
cluding buyer behavior and market segmenta-
tion) provides the foundation for marketing
strategy (involving product policy, pricing, com-
munication, and channels of distribution).
Restricted to Sloan Fellows.

B. E. Bund

15.812 Marketing Management

Prereq.: 14.01
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-6

Similar content to 15.810, but coverage is
deeper and more extensive. Primarily for non-
Sloan School graduate students and under-
graduate students. In the event the subject is
oversubscribed, priority is given to Course 15
students.

S. Jap, W. J. Qualls

15.814 Marketing Management

Prereq.: 15.061 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An examination of the key concepts and
processes of marketing, with emphasis on the
relationship of marketing and R&D. Customer
analysis (including buyer behavior and market
segmentation) provides the foundation for
marketing strategy (involving product policy,
pricing, communication, and channels of dis-
tribution). Restricted to Management of Tech-
nology students.

B. E. Bund

Descriptions of Subjects 449


--- 05.pdf Page 19 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.820 Advanced Marketing
Management

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Concentrates on advanced topics in market-
ing. Guest speakers, projects, and team par-
ticipation in a marketing strategy game.
Primarily for Sloan School of Management
graduate students; others admitted by permis-
sion of instructor.

W. J. Qualls

15.824 Advertising, Promotion, and
Marketing Communications

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on issues involved in the manage-
ment of advertising and promotion strategy.
Familiarizes students with concepts and techni-
ques relevant to the planning and control of
marketing communication campaigns. Lec-
tures, guest speakers, case discussions,
projects.

N. T. Tavassoli

15.825 Marketing Decision Support

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.812 or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Modern databases and computer models for
supporting tactical and strategic decisions in
marketing. Basic modeling approaches. Scan-
ner data. Multinomial logit and other discrete
choice models. Database marketing. Models
for specific decision areas, including price,
promotion, advertising, distribution, and sales
force. Integrative models for the marketing mix.
J. D. C. Little

15.826 Channels of Distribution

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the elements and management of
marketing channels — interorganizational sys-
tems involved in the task of making products
and services available for consumption. Em-
phasis is on channel strategy design and selec-
tion, and. the ongoing management of
relationships between system participants

such as retailers, wholesalers, and the
marketplace.

S. Jap

15.827 Consumer Marketing

Prereq.: 15.870 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814
or permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides a comprehensive framework and a
variety of concepts to analyze and understand
the consumer in order to develop better
marketing strategies. Lectures, guest
speakers, case discussions, projects.

N. T. Tavassoli

15.828 New Product Development

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814

G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

identifies new market opportunities. Designs

“core benefits” of a new product having high
potential. Designs physical product and market-
ing mix to fulfill the “core benefits.” Testing,
launching, and managing the new product.
Develops theory, measurement, and models to
manage this process. Requires term project.

D. Prelec

15.829 International Marketing
(New)

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814

G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Enables students to identify, analyze, and

resolve strategic international marketing
problems; and formulate, implement, and
evaluate international marketing strategies at
the level of the business unit for international
market entry, expansion and global rationaliza-
tion. Specific topics range from the effect of cul-
ture on the decision to standardize or adapt
marketing programs, to international branding,
communication, distribution, and pricing is-
sues, to analyzing organizational structures for
international marketing effectiveness.

N. T. Tavassoli

15.832 Measurement for Management

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814

G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Familiarizes students with methods for collect-
ing, analyzing, and interpreting data relevant
to the managerial decision-making process.
Surveys design, sampling, questionnaire
design, focus groups, experimentation, scal-
ing, and data analysis. Focuses on measure-
ment of perceptions, attitudes, and
preferences. Lectures, guest speakers,
projects.

D. Prelec

15.834 Marketing Strategy

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814

G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines strategic marketing. Strong em-
phasis on customer analysis as the founda-
tion, with decisions about product, price,
distribution and communication based on that
customer foundation. Includes current trends
and issues in marketing.

B. E. Bund

15.837 Special Seminar in Marketing

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814
G (Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-
dents on current topics related to marketing
not otherwise included in curriculum.

D. Prelec

15.838 Research Seminar in Marketing

Prereq.: 15.810 or 15.811 or 15.812 or 15.814
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar on current marketing literature and
current research interests of faculty and stu-
dents. Topics such as the game theory, com-
petitive strategy, marketing experimentation,
consumer behavior, and the development of
marketing models. Restricted to doctoral stu-
dents.

D. Prelec

15.839 Workshop in Marketing

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Presentations by faculty, doctoral students,
and guest speakers of ongoing research relat-
ing to current issues in marketing. Topics:
reports of research projects (proposed or in
progress) and informal discussions of recent
literature dealing with subjects of special inter-
est to participants. Primarily for doctoral stu-
dents.

W. J. Qualls, D. Prelec

System Dynamics

15.874 System Dynamics for Business
Policy

Prereq.: —
G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Why do so many business strategies fail? Intro-
duction to system dynamics modeling applied
to corporate strategy. Uses a mixture of simula-
tion models, role-playing games, and case
studies to develop principles for successful
management of complex strategies in a
dynamic world. Case studies of successful
strategy design using system dynamics. Con-
siders strategic issues such as business
cycles, market growth and stagnation, the dif-
fusion of new technologies, the misuse of
forecasts, and the rationality of managerial
decision making.

J. D. Sterman

15.875 Applications of System
Dynamics

Prereq.: 15.874

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall, Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Project-based subject, applying methods of
system dynamics to real corporate problems.
Class divided into groups that act as consult-
ants to local corporations. Meetings with cor-
porate managers and staff to obtain
information for model construction; instructor
provides advice and guidance on model for-
mulation and testing. Final report on work
done and recommendations. Alternate years.
J. D. Sterman

450 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 20 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.876 Principles of Dynamic Systems

Prereq.: 15.874

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continues philosophy and methods of 15.874,

with purpose of expanding students’ ability to
build computer simulation models and analyze
behavior arising from complex dynamic feed-
back systems. Topics: translating qualitative
observations on real systems into quantitative
models; methods for relating system structure
to system behavior; common errors in model

construction and policy design. Alternate years.

J. D. Sterman

15.879 Research Seminar in System
Dynamics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Discusses current research problems in sys-

tem dynamics. Topics vary from term to term.
Restricted to doctoral students.
Consult J. D. Sterman.

Corporate Strategy and
Policy

15.930 Strategic Management
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

2-0-6

15.931 Strategic Management
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Deals with approaches to strategic manage-

ment problems affecting all facets of the
enterprise. Discussions, cases, and readings
trace strategy practice, methodology, and
theory. Focus on both strategic formulation
and implementation. 15.930 useful as a broad
introduction to the corporate strategy field and
is restricted to Sloan School of Management
graduate students. 15.931 has sections for
Sloan Fellows and non-Sloan students.
15.930: M. A. Cusumano, M. S. Scott Morton
15.931: A. C. Hax

15.932 Technology Strategy

Prereq.: 15.930 or 15.931 and 15.011 or
equivalent

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Outlines tools for formulating and evaluating

technology strategy, including an introduction
to the economics of technical change, models
of technological evolution, and models of or-
ganizational dynamics and innovation. Topics
covered include: making money from innova-
tion; competition between technologies and
the selection of standards; optimal licensing
policies; joint ventures; and theories of dif-
fusion and adoption. Taught using a combina-
tion of readings and case studies.

S. Stem

15.933 Advanced Strategic Management

Prereq.: 15.930 or 15.931 or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on some important issues in strategic

management. Builds on foundation provided
by the basic subject in strategic management
(15.930 or 15.931) and applies perspectives in
new, relevant, and challenging directions.
Course emphasizes a technological and global
outlook since this orientation highlights sig-
nificant emerging trends in strategic manage-
ment.

A. C. Hax

15.934 Internal Organization, Strategy, and
Management

Prereq.: 15.341 or 15.342J or permission of in-

structor

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Doctoral seminar on research in corporate

strategy and organization theory explores the
structures, strategies, and managerial proces-
ses in formal organizations. Topics include: al-
ternative theories of firm behavior; economic,
structural, institutional and technological em-
beddedness; resources, routines, and com-
petencies; organizational architectures and
attention structures; politics, networks, and so-
cial identities; inertia and adaptation; organiza-
tional learning; strategic decisions and
directions. Alternate years.

Information: D. R. Lessard. -

15.935 Corporate Strategies and Practices
in Service Industries

Prereq.: 15.930 or 15.931 or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on competitive and strategic issues in
three service industries: retailing, airlines, and
commercial banking. Emphasis on how com-
panies respond to competitive pressures and
rapid change, especially when they are under
duress. Examples of subjects covered are:
competitive positioning and restructuring, or-
ganizational and management-related issues,
business planning processes, etc.

M. Segall

15.936 Applied Corporate Analysis

Prereq.: 15.410 or 15.415; 15.760, 15.810
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides practice in identifying important
management issues, making reasoned judg-
ments about priorities, and defending choice of
issues and priorities. Students assume roles of
managers and board members in class ses-
sions simulating top management and board
meetings. Visits to operating and corporate ex-
ecutives. Limited to 20.

W. F. Pounds

15.937 Proseminar in Strategic
Management and Consulting
(New)

Prereq.: 15.930
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides students with a broad exposure to
practical matters that affect strategic manage-
ment and the consulting industry. To fulfill that
objective, the proseminar invites distinguished
executives from business and consulting firms.
During a two-hour period the speakers ex-
change concepts, ideas, and methodologies
pertaining to strategic management and busi-
ness consulting practices.

A. C. Hax

Descriptions of Subjects 451


--- 05.pdf Page 21 ---
Sloan School of Management

15.939 Strategic Options and Information
Technology

Prereq.: 15.930 or 15.931
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The twin forces of a global business environ-

ment that is turbulent and likely to remain so,
and shifting customer ideas of value, are put-
ting many organizations under real pressure.
At the same time, information technology is
rapidly changing. This, in turn, can change
how and where work gets done and which or-
ganizational forms will be most effective. Sub-
ject explores these issues and suggests ways
of thinking about what organizational forms are
most likely to emerge over the next decades.
M. S. Scott Morton

15.940 Environment and Product/Process
Strategy

Prereq.: 15.010 or 15.011 or equivalent
G (Spring)
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the challenges and opportunities
faced by firms with environmentally sensitive
products and problematic internal process tech-
nologies. Cases and readings cover the inter-
action of market structure, corporate strategy
and management practice as they respond to
evolving systems of environmental regulation,
concepts of extended producer responsibility,
and informal means of influence by suppliers,
customers, and advocacy groups.

H. D. Jacoby

15.941) Managing the Real Estate
Company

(Same subject as 11.430J)

Prereq.: 11.431J or 15.415 or 15.412
G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on management abilities — to design
innovative strategies and organizations, to
motivate, to negotiate, and to create and sus-
tain learning environments — which are crucial
for success. Topics include: globalization and
strategic alliances, strategic planning, industry
and organization restructuring, organization
design and learning, managing organization
change, quality and asset management, inter-
national management, international computer
networks and implementation of information
technology, and ethics. Students are required
to participate in field research projects.

G. Schuck, S. A. Lambert

452 Chapter Vill

Special Studies

15.UR Undergraduate Research in
Management

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

15.URG Undergraduate Studies in
Management

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Participation in the work of a research group

which includes such activities as independent
study of the literature, direct involvement in the
group's research (commensurate with the
student's skills and preparation), or project
work under an individual faculty member pos-
sibly extending over more than one term. Ad-
mission by arrangement with individual faculty
member. Requires written project report. Stu-
dents wanting a letter grade should register
under 15.URG.

J. S. Carroll

15.950 Special Studies in Management
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

15.951 Special Studies in Management

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Special tutorial arrangement with a faculty

member for guided reading, research,
laboratory, or teaching experience.
J. A. Meldman

15.952-15.959 Special Seminars in
Management

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by undergraduate

students on current topics related to manage-
ment not otherwise included in curriculum.
15.952 is taught P/D/F.

Consult Undergraduate Program Head-
quarters.

15.960 Special Studies in Management
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

15.961 Special Studies in Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

For graduate students who desire to do ad-
vanced work or to carry out some special in-
vestigation of a management problem not
specifically covered elsewhere and not qualify-
ing as a thesis. Readings, conferences,
laboratory and fieldwork, and reports.

Consult Sloan Educational Services.

15.962—15.971 Special Seminars in
Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

15.972-15.976 Special Seminars in
Management

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F] H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Opportunity for group study by graduate stu-
dents on current topics related to management
not otherwise included in curriculum.

Consult Sloan Educational Services.

15.978 Seminar in Management!

Prereq.: 15.511
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides students opportunities to meet senior
executives of private and public institutions,
and to discuss key management issues from
the perspective of top management. Students
prepare detailed briefings identifying and
analyzing important management issues
facing these organizations. Seminar concludes
with a one-week field trip to southern Connec-
ticut and New York City. Restricted to Sloan
Fellows.

S. C. Lowance

15.979 Seminar in Management Il

Prereq.: 15.978
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Continuation of subject 15.978 on the iden-
tification and analysis of important manage-
ment issues. Students prepare briefings and
meet with senior government and international
leaders during field trips to Washington and a
selected international area. Restricted to Sloan
Fellows.

S. C. Lowance


--- 05.pdf Page 22 ---
School of Management Course 15

15.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research and writing of
thesis; to be arranged by the student with su-
pervising committee.

Descriptions of Subjects 453


--- 05.pdf Page 23 ---
School of Engineering

Course 16

Core Undergraduate Subjects

16.00 Introduction to Aerospace
Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-1-5

Presents the fundamental concepts and ap-

proaches of aerospace engineering in the con-
text of a series of conceptual design studies of
aerospace vehicles and their subsystems; com-
mercial transport aircraft, launch vehicles,
fighter aircraft, aircraft engines, rocket en-
gines, atmospheric reentry vehicles, control
systems. The performance, weight, and prin-
cipal characteristics of these systems are es-
timated and illustrated using physics,
mathematics, and chemistry known to entering
freshmen, the emphasis being on the applica-
tion of this knowledge to aerospace engineer-
ing rather than on exposure to new science
and mathematics.

D. J. Newman

16.010 Unified Engineering |
Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03 or 18.034
U (Fall)

4-2-6 REST

16.020 Unified Engineering Il

Prereq.: 8.02, 18.03 or 18.034
U (Fall)
4-1-7

16.010 and 16.020 require simultaneous

registration. Presents the principles and
methods of engineering, as well as their inter-
relationships and applications, through lec-
tures, recitations, design problems, and labs.
Disciplines introduced include: statics,
materials and structures, dynamics, fluid
dynamics, thermodynamics, materials, propul-
sion, signal and system analysis, and circuits.
Topics: mechanics of solids and fluids; statics
and dynamics for bodies systems and net-
works; conservation of mass and momentum;
properties of solids and fluids; temperature,
conservation of energy; stability and response
of static and dynamic systems. Applications in-
clude particle and rigid body dynamics; stress
and deformations in truss members; airfoils
and nozzles in high-speed flow; passive and
active circuits. Laboratory exposure to empiri-
cal methods in engineering; illustration of prin-
ciples and practice. Design of typical aircraft or
spacecraft elements.

S. R. Hall, J. J. Deyst, W. L. Harris,

W. R. Markey, S. M. Spearing

Aeronautics and
Astronautics

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Engineering.

16.030 Unified Engineering III

Prereq.: 16.010, 16.020

U (Spring)

4-2-6

16.040 Unified Engineering IV

Prereq.: 16.010, 16.020

U (Spring)
4-1-7

16.030 and 16.040 require simultaneous

registration. Presents concepts, principles, and
methods of engineering, emphasizing unified
presentation of disciplines, by application to
high-technology devices and aerospace sys-
tems. Topics: behavior and failure of structural
materials; dynamics of systems; low-speed
flows; representation of information. Applica-
tions include stresses and deformations in
beams and columns; failure modes in struc-
tures, fracture, fatigue, plasticity; flow over
bodies, lift and drag of airfoils and wings;
dynamics of aircraft, spacecraft, and orbital
transfer; aircraft and rocket engines; filtering,
sampling, and modulation. Techniques
presented for modeling and optimization of sys-
tems. Experiments in mechanics, subsonic
and supersonic flows, system dynamics,
analog networks and circuits. Design and
evaluation of an aircraft or spacecraft com-
ponent.

S. R. Hall, J. J. Deyst, W. L. Harris,

W. R. Markey, S. M. Spearing

16.050 Thermal Energy
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 16.030-16.040
U (Fall)
3-1-8

Thermodynamic principles relevant to en-

gineering processes, particularly aerospace
power generation and propulsive cycles,
aeroengine components, and overall perfor-
mance. Introduction to analysis of conductive,
convective, and radiative heat transfer.
Aerospace propulsion as an example showing
application of ideas developed in 16.010-
16.040. Key roles of thermal energy manage-
ment in setting the design of high-performance
vehicles.

E. M. Greitzer

16.060 Principles of Automatic Control

Prereq.: 16.030-16.040
U (Fall)
3-2-7

Introduction to design of feedback control sys-
tems. Properties and advantages of feedback
systems. Time domain and frequency-domain
performance measures. Stability and degree
of stability. Root locus method. Nyquist
criterion. Frequency-domain design. Compen-
sation techniques. Application to a variety of
aero and astro systems.

W. R. Markey, J. J. Deyst

Mechanics and Physics of Fluids

16.100 Aerodynamics

Prereq.: 16.030—16.040 or 2.20 or 1.06; 16.050
U (Fall)
4-1-7

Air as a continuum, free molecular flow. Dimen-
sionless parameters and scaling. Similarity
concepts. Velocity potential and stream func-
tion. Vorticity, circulation, Biot-Savart. Conser-
vation equations. Generalized Bernoulli
equation. Kelvin impulse. Lift, drag, and thrust
from the momentum equation. 2-D wings, sub-
sonic flow, supersonic flow. Slender bodies,
fuselages. Boundary layers (laminar and tur-
bulent), Kutta condition. Skin friction and heat
transfer. Separation and stall. Role of stream-
lining. Unsteady flow.

K. S. Breuer

16.110 Flight Vehicle Aerodynamics

Prereq.: 16.100
G (Spring)

3-1-8

Aerodynamic analysis of flight vehicles using
analytical, numerical, and experimental techni-
ques separately and in combination. Matched
asymptotic expansions. Farfield behavior.
Finite wing theory. Trefftz-plane analysis.
Laminar and turbulent boundary layers.
Slender body theory. Calculation and measure-
ment of drag components. Aerodynamic
stability derivatives.

M. Drela

454 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 24 ---
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16

16.121 Low-Speed Aerodynamics

Prereq.: 16.100
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced techniques in fluid mechanics, em-

phasizing both the underlying physics and their
applications to subsonic and transonic flight
vehicles. Advanced topics in laminar and tur-
bulent boundary layers. Separation and stall.
Vorticity kinematics and dynamics. Behavior of
strong vortices and vortex bursting. Unsteady
flows. Low- and high-aspect ratio wings.
Slender body theory. Transonic flow.

M. T. Landahl

16.122 High-Speed Aerodynamics

Prereq.: 16.100
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Aerodynamic loading on wings of high- and

low- aspect ratios, and on slender bodies at su-
personic speeds. Minimum drag. Transonic
flow. Hypersonic inviscid flow. Boundary layers
at high Mach numbers

M. T. Landahl

16.123 Gases and Fluids in the Space
Environment

Prereq.: 16.100, 6.041, 8.03
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The space environment. Scales, mean free

path. Nondimensional numbers. Temperature
and transport coefficients. Kinetic theory and
statistical mechanics (Boltzmann equation,
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution, entropy). Con-
tinuum equations (boundary conditions, slip,
reacting surfaces). Planetary atmospheres.
Electromagnetic environment. Reentry (heat
balance). Gravity-free flows. Reaction kinetics.
D. E. Hastings

16.13 Aerodynamics of Viscous Fluids

Prereq.: 16.110, or 16.121 or 16.122
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Boundary layers as rational approximations to

the solutions of exact equations of fluid mo-
tion. Physical parameters influencing laminar
and turbulent aerodynamic flows and transi-
tion. Effects of compressibility and heat con-
duction. Influence of boundary layers on outer
potential flow and appropriate numerical solu-
tion techniques. Numerical exercises require
familiarity with FORTRAN or similar language.
M. Drela

16.14 Transition and Turbulence
Prereq.: 16.110 or 16.121

G (Spring)

4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis and description of transitional.and tur-

bulent flows drawing from theoretical, numeri-
cal, and experimental approaches. Linear and
nonlinear stability theory. Three-dimensional
disturbances and bypass transition.
Homogeneous turbulence. Kolmogorov theory.
Structure of turbulence shear flows, including
the dynamics of coherent structures in near-
wall boundary layers. Turbulence modeling.
Other topics of current research interest.

K. S. Breuer

16.150 Unsteady Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 16.121

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fluid mechanics of fixed airfoils, wings, bodies,

and cascades in unsteady potential flows; or
moving airfoils, wings, bodies, and cascades in
a uniform stream. Methods (analytical and
numerical) for predicting the pressure on un-
steadily moving bodies in subsonic, transonic,
and supersonic flow. A limited discussion of
viscous effects, boundary layers, aerodynamic
noise generation, flow instability, and separa-
tion introduced where appropriate. Alternate
years.

M. T. Landahl

16.160 Computational Fluid Dynamics

Prereq.: 16.90 or 18.086, 16.100
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Computational methods for compressible invis-

cid and viscous flow. Euler and Navier-Stokes
equations in general nonorthogonal, cur-
vilinear coordinates, grid generation, struc-
tured and unstructured meshes. Finite-
difference, finite-volume, finite-element solu-
tion techniques. Draws applications from inter-
nal and external flow problems in aerospace
vehicles. Assignments requiring use of digital
computer.

J. Peraire

Structures and Materials

16.20 Structural Mechanics |

Prereq.: 16.030-16.040
U (Fall)
5-0-7

Applies solid mechanics to analysis of high-
technology structures. Structural design con-
siderations. Review of three-dimensional
elasticity theory; stress, strain, anisotropic
materials, heating effects. Two-dimensional
plane stress and plane strain problems. Tor-
sion theory for arbitrary sections. Bending of
unsymmetrical section and mixed material
beams. Bending, shear, and torsion of thin-
wall shell beams. Buckling of columns and
stability phenomena. Introduction to structural
dynamics. Exercises in the design of general
and aerospace structures.

H. L. McManus

16.202 Manufacturing with Advanced
Composite Materials

Prereq,: —
U (Fall)
1-3-2

Introduces the methods used to manufacture
parts made of advanced composite materials
in the Technology Laboratory for Advanced
Composites. Students gain hands-on ex-
perience by fabricating, machining, instrument-
ing, and testing graphite/epoxy specimens.
Students also design, build, and test a com-
posite structure as part of a design contest.
Lectures supplement laboratory sessions with
background information on the nature of com-
posites, curing, composite machining, secon-
dary bonding, and the testing of composites.
S. M. Spearing

16.210 Structural Mechanics Il

Prereq.: 16.20
G (Spring)
4-0-8

Introduces analysis techniques for complex
structures and the role of material properties in
structural design, failure, and longevity. Energy
principles in structural analysis and applica-
tions to statically-indeterminate structures and
solid continua. Matrix and finite-element
methods of structured analysis including bars,
beams, and two-dimensional plane stress ele-
ments. Structural materials and their proper-
ties; metals, composites. Modes of structural
failure. Criteria for yielding and fracture. Crack
formation and fracture mechanics. Fatigue and
design for longevity. Other failure modes.
Structural design project.

N. W. Hagood

Descriptions of Subjects 455


--- 05.pdf Page 25 ---
School of Engineering

16.221 Structural Dynamics
Prereq.: 16.20

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Vibrations of simple and complex structures:

bars, strings, rods, beams, plates; emphasizes
physical concepts. Analyzes continuous and
multimass systems. Formulation and applica-
tion of diverse methods; finite element,
Galerkin, integral equation, and numerical col-
location. Variational principles in dynamics:
Hamilton's Principle and Lagrange’s equa-
tions. Transient response solution by modal su-
perposition and direct numerical integration
techniques. Self-excited vibrations, dynamic
stability. Wave propagation concepts.

M. Van Schoor

16.222 Mechanics of Filamentary
Composite Materials

Prereq.: 16.20
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Mechanical behavior of advanced filamentary

composite materials composed of boron,
graphite, glass, and Kevlar fibers embedded in
a matrix. Material properties of fibers and
matrices. Micromechanics, anisotropic elas-
ticity, tensor notation, and Classical Laminated
Plate Theory. Also includes failure analysis,
buckling, sandwich construction, thermal and
moisture stresses, and interlaminar stresses.
Design concepts and cost-effective applica-
tions

J. Dugundji

16.230 Plates and Shells

Prereq.: 16.222, 16.210

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Review of classical plate theory with applica-

tions. Composite plates, transverse shear ef-
fects, large deflections. Elements of differential
geometry. General formulation of elasticity in
curvilinear coordinates. Development of shell
equations in general form for bending of thin
shells. Membrane theory, cylindrical shells,
edge zones. Alternate years.

H. L. McManus

16.241 Advanced Structural Dynamics

Prereq.: 16.221

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews transient response of linear systems.

Emphasizes nonlinear vibrations and transient
response of structures; elastic and inelastic
material behavior and large deflections. Modal
and direct numerical timewise integration tech-
niques. Transient force, strain, and displace-
ment responses. Dynamic instability of
mechanical systems, follower forces. Mechani-
cal filtering. Forced and parametric excitation.
Instabilities of rotating structures. Effects of
non-linear vibrations. Alternate years.

M. Van Schoor

16.242 Aeroelasticity

Prereq.: 16.221, 16.100

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents field of aeroelasticity from unified
viewpoint, applicable to flight structures as well
as buildings, suspension bridges, and other
structures. Static aeroelastic and flutter in-
stabilities of simple and complex structures.
Similarity laws and wind-tunnel modeling.
Responses to gusts and random excitation.
Derivation of unsteady airloads. Active control
concepts for aeroelasticity. Alternate years.

E. F. Crawley, M. Van Schoor

16.243 Dynamics of Controlled Structures

Prereq.: 16.221, 16.31

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Presents control-structural dynamic interaction
from a unified viewpoint, applicable to flexible
space structures, precision structures, and
aero-servo-elastic lifting surfaces. Preliminary
design of controlled structures. Damped struc-
tures, modeling of dissipative and nonlinear ef-
fects. Isolation systems. Formulations of
controllers for reduced-order models. Control-
structure interaction and spillover. System iden-
tification. Alternate years.

E. F. Crawley

16.251 Structural Design for Longevity

Prereq.: 16.20

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Longevity is the most difficult of all the struc-
tural integrity requirements for aerospace
vehicles. Examines the many aspects of lon-
gevity such as frequency of loads, fatigue of
materials, growth of cracks, safe-life
philosophy, fail-safe philosophy, probabilistic
failure analysis, damage tolerance, stress con-
centrations, scatter factors, testing. Introduces
linear elastic fracture mechanics and its use.
Emphasizes application of theory to practice. A
portion devoted to study of case histories. Al-
ternate years.

P. A, Lagace

16.26 Thermal Structures

Prereq.: 16.20

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to heat transfer. Temperature dis-
tributions and heat flows in structures. Ther-
moelasticity, thermal deformations and
stresses, induced failure and buckling.
Coupled thermostructural problems, tempera-
ture dependence of material properties,
degradation, ablation and charring. Examples
from high-speed aircraft structures, turbine
and rocket engines, and space structures. Al-
ternate years.

H. L. McManus

16.28 Adaptive Materials and Structures

Prereq.: 16.210, 16.060

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to materials and structures
capable of controllable response to their en-
vironment. Reviews elasticity, electro/magneto
statics. Characteristics and modelling of adap-
tive materials employing piezoelectric,
electrostrictive, and shape memory effects.
Linear electroelastic and nonlinear modelling
of adaptive structures incorporating such
materials. Distributed induced-strain actuation
of beams and plates. Energy methods for ap-
proximate analysis of more complex struc-
tures. Distributed structural strain sensing.
Sensor and actuator placement and structure
manufacture with embedded components. Dis-
tributed control topics including processing ar-
chitecture and adaptation. Alternate years.

N. W. Hagood

16.29 Advanced Topics in Filamentary
Composites

Prereq.: 16.222

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
2-0-4 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Generalized study of the anisotropic properties
of composite laminates. Anisotropic buckling,
environmental effects, interlaminar stresses.
Reviews current problems in the applications
of composite materials in the aerospace and
automotive industries. Guest lecturers share
their experiences.

P. A. Lagace, H. L. McManus, S. M. Spearing

16.295 Failure Mechanics of Composite
Materials
(New)

Prereq.: 16.222 or equivalent (with instructor's
approval)

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Unified treatment of the failure mechanics of
composite material from micro-mechanics
through to macroscopic models for material
and structural behavior. The mechanics and
fracture behavior of polymer, metal, intermetal-
lic, and ceramic matrix composites are com-
pared and contrasted. Strengths and
weaknesses of the modeling approaches are
assessed and discussed. Presents case
studies in composite design. Alternate years.
S. M. Spearing, P. A. Lagace, H. L. McManus

456 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 26 ---
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16

Instrumentation, Control, and
Estimation

16.300 Measurement, Estimation, and
Navigation

Prereq.: 16.060, 6.041
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Introduction to the estimation of variables from

noisy measurements. Linearization of non-
linear measurements. Treatment of navigation
as a problem in measurement. Application to
inertial and radio navigation systems. Con-
sideration of power requirements, bandwidth,
signal-to-noise ratio, and measurement techni-
ques. Comparative analysis of competitive
navigation systems.

W. M. Hollister

16.31 Feedback Control Systems

Prereq.: 16.060
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Introduction to the state-space approach to

control system analysis and control synthesis.
State-space representation of dynamic sys-
tems; controllability and observability; state-
space realizations of transfer functions; and
canonical forms. Design of controllers using
state-space methods, including pole place-
ment and optimal control methods. Introduc-
tion to the Kalman filter. Limitations on
performance of control systems from classical
and state-space perspectives. Introduction to
robustness of multivariable control systems,
using frequency domain techniques.

E. Feron

16.322 Stochastic Estimation and Control

Prereq.: 16.060, 6.041, or 6.431
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Estimation and control of dynamic systems.

Brief review of probability and random vari-
ables. Classical and state-space descriptions
of random processes and their propagation
through linear systems. Frequency domain
design of filters and compensators. The Kal-
man filter to estimate the states of dynamic
systems. Conditions for stability of the filter
equations.

W. E. Vander Velde

16.323 Principles of Optimal Control

Prereq.: 18.085
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies the principles of deterministic optimal

control. Variational calculus and Pontryagin’s
maximum principle. Applications of the theory,
including optimal feedback control, time-op-
timal control, and others. Dynamic program-
ming and numerical search algorithms
introduced briefly.

W. E. Vander Velde

16.333 Advanced Flight Dynamics and
Control

Prereq.: 16.060

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Brief review of applied aerodynamics. Wing,
fuselage, and tail contributions. Power, com-
pressibility, and aeroelastic effects. Modern ap-
proach to aircraft stability and control. Motion
along steep trajectories, reentry dynamics, and
stability of a shuttle vehicle. Human pilot
models and autopilots. Variable flight condi-
tions. VTOL transition, dynamics and control.
Minimum drift control of launch vehicles. Multi-
ple scales analysis. Sensitivity to parameter
variations in variable systems. Motion at high
angle-of-attack, roll coupling, and other non-
linear flight regimes.

R. V. Ramnath

16.334 Advanced Control of Flight
Vehicles

Prereq.: 16.060

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Application of design techniques and principles

to advanced control systems for air and space
vehicles. Review of nondimensional equations
of motion. Classical and modern control techni-
ques applied to flight vehicle stabilization.

Time and frequency domain analysis of control
system performance. Models for pilot-in-the-
loop control. Prediction and validation of
vehicle handling qualities. Introduction to digi-
tal control techniques. Control system design
to meet mission requirements, including robust-
ness criteria. Adaptive control and display
design. Alternate years.

J. D. Paduano

16.335 Spacecraft Dynamics and Control

Prereq.: 16.060
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews rigid body kinematics and dynamics
for small and large rotations. Reviews attitude
sensors and actuators and the attitude
guidance and control problem. Open-loop
stability analyses are developed for a variety of
equilibrium conditions; spinners, dual spinners,
gravity gradient equilibria. Active control is ap-
plied to the same examples: figure control of
mirrors, linear control for pitch and coupled
roll/yaw motion, active nutation damping. Orbit
attitude coupling in spacecraft dynamics.
Stabilization and distributed control of defor-
mable reflectors. Effects of fuel slosh and struc-
tural flexibility covered briefly. Alternate years.
R. V. Ramnath

16.337J Dynamics of Nonlinear Systems

(Same subject as 6.243J, 2.156J)
Prereq.: 18.100, 6.241

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.243J.
R. Ramnath, J. L. Wyatt, Jr., M. Dahleh,
N. Hogan

16.338 Nonlinear Aerospace Control
Systems

Prereq.: 16.060 or 6.302 and 6.241 or 16.31
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to nonlinear systems: ordinary dif-
ferential equations — second-order systems:
phase-plane technique — qualitative study of
various nonlinearities: deadband, saturation,
dry friction, backlash. Control system design in
phase-plane. Pulse modulation techniques for
on-off systems; pulse width, pulse frequency
modulation — aerospace examples. Relation
to optimal control. Heuristic nonlinear system
analysis via describing functions: theoretical
foundations and practical criteria. Limitations —
nonheuristic nonlinear system analysis techni-
ques: Lyapunov’s stability theory, Popov's
criterion — computational issues.

E. Feron

16.343 Spacecraft and Aircraft Sensors and
Instrumentation

Prereq.: 16.040, 8.03

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Covers fundamental sensor and instrumenta-
tion principles in the context of systems
designed for space or atmospheric flight. Sys-
tems discussed are incoherent and doppler
radars; space communications; spacecraft at-
titude determination by stellar, solar, and
horizon sensing; remote sensing by
radiometry, spectrometry, and interferometry;
air data systems; and radio navigation. Also,
review of basic electromagnetic theory and an-
tenna design. Discussion of design considera-
tions for flight.

R. J. Hansman

16.346 Astrodynamics |
(Revised Content and Units)

Prereq.: 18.03 or equivalent
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of astrodynamics; the two-body
orbital initial-value problem and boundary-
value problems with applications to space
vehicle navigation and guidance for lunar and
planetary exploration. Topics: celestial
mechanics, Kepler's problem, Lambert's prob-
lem, orbit determination, mission planning, and
recursive algorithms for space navigation.
Selected applications from the Apollo and
Space Shuttle Programs

R. H. Battin

Descriptions of Subjects 457


--- 05.pdf Page 27 ---
School of Engineering

16.347 Astrodynamics Il
(Revised Content and Units)

Prereq.: 16.346 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of space vehicle guidance and

navigation with applications for both powered
flight and midcourse maneuvers; precision
orbit determination methods. Topics: universal
orbital variables, variation of parameters, new
algorithms for Kepler's and Lambert's
problems, multi-body methods; Legendre func-
tions, attitude determination using quaternions,
linearized and explicit techniques for targeting,
hodograph analysis, and numerical integration.
R. H. Battin

16.357 Active Control of Fluid Systems

Prereq.: 16.121 or 16.31 or permission of in-

structor

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A multidisciplinary subject treating new con-

cepts for dynamic control of fluid flows and sys-
tems typical of modern industrial practice.
Review of feedback control and signal
analysis. Elements of unsteady fluid dynamics
and system modelling. Applications from a
number of fields including “anti-sound,” active
control of aeroengine system instabilities, sup-
pression of instabilities in simple combustion
systems, control and modification of multi-
dimensional fluid flows, and active control of
rotating stall in turbomachinery. Alternate
years.

J. D. Paduano

16.381 Lasers and Optics for
Applications |

Prereq.: 8.03 or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of lasers and physical optics, in-

cluding fiberoptics and integrated optics for
those interested in applications. Topics include
a simplified treatment of lasers and their
coherence properties, optics of laser beams,
propagation of light in vacuum, dielectrics,
fibers, waveguides, and anisotropic media.
Types of lasers. Applications in sensing of dis-
placement, temperature, strain, flow, rotation
rate (gyroscope), magnetic and electric fields,
acoustics, and molecular species.

Staff

16.382 Lasers and Optics for
Applications Il

Prereq.: 16.381 or 6.631 or 8.243
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A more advanced treatment of lasers and op-

tics. Calculation of atom-field interactions for
weak and strong fields. Spontaneous and
stimulated emission, and line-broadening
mechanisms. Steady-state and transient be-
havior of lasers. Survey of gas, liquid, solid,
semiconductor, and fiberoptic lasers. Non-
linear optics. Harmonic generation and mixing.
Modulation and deflection of optical beams.
Stimulated Raman and Brillouin scattering.
Control and manipulation of laser behavior.
Noise in lasers and optical amplifiers. Selected
applications in science and engineering.

Staff

Humans and Automation

16.400 Human Factors Engineering
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 16.453J, 2.181J)
Prereq.: 16.060 or 2.010

U (Fall)

3-1-8

Meets with graduate subject 16.453J, but as-

signments differ. See description under subject
16.453J.
L. R. Young, T. B. Sheridan

16.401J Quantitative Physiology: Sensory
and Motor Systems

(Same subject as 6.023J, 2.793), HST.543J)

Prereq.: 2.003 or 6.003 or 16.060
U (Spring)
3-2-7

See description under subject 6.023J.
L. Young, L. S. Frishkopf, C. Wall Ill, N. Hogan

16.410 Optimization and Decision Analysis

Prereq.: 16.060, 6.041

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Survey of fundamental methodologies in

automated decision-making and decision sup-
port systems. Classical approaches to op-
timization; linear programming; network
optimization; discrete optimization and integer
programming; dynamic programming. Introduc-
tion to single-attribute and multi-attribute
decision analysis. Emphasis on modeling and
applications.

E. Feron

16.422J Human Supervisory Control of
Telerobots and Flight Vehicles

(Same subject as 2.182J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 2.182J.
T. B. Sheridan, R. J. Hansman

16.423 Aerospace Physiology and Life
Support Engineering

Prereq.: 16.400

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of human performance, physiol-
ogy, and life support impacting engineering
design and aerospace systems. Topics in-
clude: effects of high and low G on the mus-
culoskeletal and neurovestibular systems;
human performance throughout the continuum
of gravity; human/pilot modeling and
human/machine design; flight experiment
design, manifestation, and analysis; and life
support engineering for extreme environments,
@.g., microgravity, extravehicular activity
(EVA), underwater, and polar regions. Assign-
ments include a design project, a journal
quality article, and quantitative homework sets
and quizzes emphasizing engineering and sys-
tems aspects.

D. J. Newman

16.431 Flight Simulation and Virtual
Environments

Prereq.: 18.03, 16.060 or 2.14
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Simulation of aircraft for research and pilot
training. Conversion of aircraft equations of
motion and data package into a digital com-
puter model. Simplified transfer functions. Prin-
ciples of vision relevant to out-the-window
displays. Implementation of CRT, model
board, and point light source displays. Cockpit
motion requirements, motion washout, artificial
control, and feel and high-g cuing devices.

J. Kuchar, L. R. Young, W. M. Hollister

16.453J Human Factors Engineering
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 2.181J, 16.400)
Prereq.: 16.060 or 2.010

G (Fall)

3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Accidents associated with “human error’ often
reflect the failure to recognize human factors
in the design stage. Reviews sensory, motor,
and cognitive performance characteristics and
derives human engineering design criteria.
Principles of displays, controls and ergonomics
are applied in various class design exercises,
and illustrated in several laboratory sessions.
Applications emphasize piloted aircraft and
space vehicles, and various ground-based sys-
tems, and treat the human/machine interface
from an engineering point of view. Open to
seniors. Meets with undergraduate subject
16.400, but requires a term project.

L. R. Young, T. B. Sheridan

16.456J Biomedical Signal and Image
Processing

(Same subject as HST.582J, 6.555J)
Prereq.: 6.003 or 2.02 or 2.003 or 18.085
G (Spring)

3-6-3 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject HST.582J.

L. Braida, B. Delgutte, A. Dobrzeniecki, J.
Greenberg

458 Chapter VIII


--- 05.pdf Page 28 ---
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16

16.458J Biomedical Instrumentation
Electronics

(Same subject as HST.570d, 2.7814)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Summer)

6-6-6

See description under subject HST.570J.

D. Rowell, S. K. Burns

16.459 Bioengineering Journal Article
Seminar

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

0-2-0

Can be repeated for credit

Each term, the class selects a new set of

professional journal articles on bioengineering
topics of current research interest. Some
papers are chosen because of particular con-
tent, others are selected because they il-
lustrate important points of methodology. Each
week, one student leads the discussion,
evaluating the strengths, weaknesses, and im-
portance of each paper. Subject may be
repeated for credit a maximum of four terms.
Letter grade given in the last term applies to all
accumulated units of 16.459.

L. R. Young, C. M. Oman

Propulsion and Energy
Conversion

16.50 Introduction to Propulsion Systems

Prereq.: 16.050
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Presents aerospace propulsive devices as sys-

tems, with functional requirements and en-
gineering and environmental limitations.
Requirements and limitations constrain design
choices. Both air-breathing and rocket engines
covered, at a level which enables rational in-
tegration of the propulsive system into an over-
all vehicle design. Mission analysis,
fundamental performance relations, and ex-
emplary design solutions presented.

J. L. Kerrebrock

16.511 Aircraft Engines and Gas Turbines

Prereq.: 16.50
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Performance and characteristics of aircraft en-

gines and industrial gas turbines, as deter-
mined by thermodynamic and fluid mechanic
behavior of components: inlets, compressors,
combustors, turbines, nozzles. Discusses
various engine types, including turbojet, tur-
bofan, and turboprop. Limitations imposed by
material properties and stresses. Emphasizes
future design trends, including reduction noise,
pollutant formation, fuel consumption, and
weight.

|. A. Waitz

16.512 Rocket Propulsion
Prereq.: 16.50

G (Fall)

3-0-9

Chemical rocket propulsion systems for

launch, orbital, and interplanetary flight. Model-
ing of solid, liquid-bipropellant, and hybrid rock-
et engines. Thermochemistry, prediction of
specific impulse. Nozzle flows including real
gas and kinetic effects. Structural constraints.
Propellant feed systems, turbopumps. Com-
bustion processes in solid, liquid, and hybrid
rockets. Cooling; heat sink, ablative, and
regenerative.

A. H. Epstein

16.521 Aircraft Turbine Engine Design

Prereq.: 16.511 or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, and solid

mechanics of aircraft turbine engines, with the
emphasis on design. Steady two-dimensional
and three-dimensional flow theories of com-
pressors and turbines. Combuster design.
Noise and emission considerations. Operation-
al limitations and instabilities. Stress and as-
sociated temperature limits and influence of
blade cooling techniques on turbines.

A.H. Epstein

16.522 Space Propulsion
Prereq.: 16.512, 8.03

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Reviews rocket propulsion fundamentals. Dis-

cusses advanced concepts in rocket propul-
sion ranging from chemical engines to
electrical engines. Topics include advanced
mission analysis, physics and engineering of
microthrusters, and solid propellant rockets,
electrothermal, electrostatic, and electro-mag-
netic schemes for accelerating propellant.
Some coverage is given of satellite power sys-
tems and their relation to propulsion systems.
M. Martinez-Sanchez

16.523 Environmental Aerospace
Engineering

Prereq.: 16.511 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on understanding, evaluating, and

developing design procedures to reduce the
environmental impact of current and future
aerospace systems, primarily aircraft emis-
sions and noise. Principles of reacting flows,
combustor design, fundamentals of acoustics,
and aircraft and engine noise sources are
presented within a broad contextual backdrop
that includes discussions of ethics, human and
global effects, the regulatory process,
economics, urban planning, and environmental
policy.

1. A. Waitz

16.540 Internal Flows in Turbomachines

Prereq.: 16.121 or 16.122 or 2.25
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General features of internal flows with applica-
tion to compressors, turbines, and propulsion
systems. Fundamental concepts of rotational
flows, inherent unsteadiness of turbo-
machines, boundary layers, wakes, and losses
and mixing in turbomachines. Axisymmetric
swirling and vortex core flows, streamline cur-
vature computations, flows in rotating blade
rows. Effects of viscosity and compressibility in
internal flows. Secondary flows and three-
dimensional effects. Flow instabilities in tur-
bomachines. Recent developments and
experimental information. Alternate years.

E. M. Greitzer

16.55 lonized Gases

Prereq.: 8.03

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Properties and behavior of low-temperature
plasmas for energy conversion, plasma propul-
sion, gas lasers. Equilibrium of ionized gases:
energy states, statistical mechanics, and equi-
librium. Kinetic theory: motion of charged par-
ticles, distribution function, collisions,
characteristic lengths and times, cross-sec-
tions, transport properties. Gas surface interac-
tions: thermionic emission, sheaths, probe
theory. Radiation in plasmas, diagnostics. Al-
ternate years.

M. Martinez-Sanchez

16.58 Aircraft Gas Turbine Structures

Prereq.: 16.511 or permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the structural design of aircraft gas
turbine engines as set by the (multidisciplinary)
coupling between aerodynamic, thermal, and
structural requirements for high-performance
propulsion systems. Topics include structures
under static loads, rotor dynamics and vibra-
tion (design of rotating blades and disks, criti-
cal speed of rotating shafts, flutter and forced
response of compressor and turbine blades),
low-cycle fatigue, and design considerations
for hot-section components used in gas tur-
bine engines.

A. H. Epstein, E. M. Greitzer, F. Ehrich

Descriptions of Subjects 459


--- 05.pdf Page 29 ---
School of Engineering

Other Undergraduate Subjects

16.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

16.URG Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in
aeronautics and astronautics. For further infor-
mation, contact W. R. Markey, Departmental
Coordinator.

16.600 Computational Tools for Engineering

Prereq.: 16.010, 16.020, or equivalent
U (IAP)
1-1-4 [P/D/F]

Introduction to computational tools and their

use in solving engineering problems, analyzing
data, and presenting scientific results.
Techniques for the practical use of spread-
sheets (XESS), mathematical and numerical
analysis packages (MATLAB), symbolic al-
gebra (MAPLE), and other Athena-based
software packages are presented. Issues of
computational accuracy and efficiency are dis-
cussed. Emphasizes problem solving using
available software packages, not programming
or algorithmic development. Enrollment may
be limited.

J. D. Paduano

16.621 Experimental Projects |

Prereq.: 6.041, 16.050, 16.060
U (Fall, Spring)
2-1-3

Introduces laboratory experimental techni-

ques. Principles of experimental design and
reliable measurement. Laboratory safety. In-
struction in effective report writing and oral
presentation. Selection and detailed planning
of an individual research project, including
design of components or equipment. Prepara-
tion of a detailed proposal for the selected
project carried through to completion under
16.622.

J. Kuchar, R. F. Perdichizzi

16.622 Experimental Projects Il
Prereq.: 16.621

U (Fall, Spring)

1-7-4 Institute LAB

Helps student gain practical insight and im-

proved understanding of engineering ex-
perimentation through design and execution of
“project” experiments. Building upon work in
16.621, student constructs and tests equip-
ment, makes systematic experimental meas-
urements of phenomena, analyzes data,
compares theoretical predictions with results.
Written final report on entire project and formal
oral presentation. Provides valuable link be-
tween theory and practice.

J. Kuchar, R. F. Perdichizzi

16.64 Flight Measurement Laboratory

Prereq.: 16.020
U (Spring)
2-2-2

Opportunity to see aeronautical theory applied

in real-world environment of flight. Students as-
sist in design and execution of simple engineer-
ing flight experiments in light aircraft. Typical
investigations include determination of stability
derivatives, verification of performance
specifications, and measurement of navigation
system characteristics. Limited to students in
Aeronautics and Astronautics.

R. J. Hansman

16.651 Computer Models of Physical and
Engineering Systems

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034, 1.00

U (Spring)

3-1-8

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 999.
F. Pefia-Mora

16.652 Inventions and Patents
Prereq.: 14.02

U (Fall)

3-0-6

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 999.
R. H. Rines

16.653 Management in Engineering

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.

Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.
J.-H, Chun

16.656 Management Topics in Engineering
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
U (IAP)
2-0-4

Directed toward the student whose objective is

a career in engineering leading to manage-
ment. Provides opportunities to examine topics
relating to the conduct of engineering activities
within a total management environment. Inter-
faces between engineering and other com-
pany functions, such as marketing, finance
manufacturing, quality, explored with em-
phasis on the management process. Special
attention given to the role of technical staff in
the acquisition of new business and long-
range planning. Seminar format based on cur-
rent industrial practice.

J. Yamron

16.66 Industrial Practice

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

0-8-0 [P/D/F]

Seven months of engineering practice, carried

out by the cooperative students at the plants of
organizations participating in the cooperative

16.67 Engineering Internship

Prereq.: —

U (Summer)

0-6-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

A summer of work experience as part of the
Engineering Internship Program. Students
register for this subject twice, receiving the
grade “J” for the first registration. Two work as-
signments must be completed in order for
credit to be awarded. Limited to students
registered in Course XVI-C.

|. A. Waitz

16.681 Special Projects

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, AP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Study or laboratory project work of under-
graduate level by qualified students. Topics
selected in consultation with the instructor.
W. R. Markey

16.682 Selected Topics in Aeronautics and
Astronautics

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Study at the undergraduate level by qualified
students. Topics selected in consultation with
the instructor.
W. R. Markey

16.683 Aeronautics and Astronautics
Seminars

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

2-0-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Speakers from campus and industry discuss
current activities and advances in aeronautics
and astronautics. Restricted to Course XVI stu-
dents.

W. R. Markey

460 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 30 ---
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16

Flight Transportation

16.72 Air Traffic Control

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the various aspects of present and
future Air Traffic Control systems. Descriptions
of the present system: systems-analysis ap-
proach to problems of capacity and safety; sur-
veillance, including NAS and ARTS; navigation
subsystem technology; aircraft guidance and
control; communications; collision avoidance
systems; sequencing and spacing in terminal
areas; future directions and development; criti-
cal discussion of past proposals and of prob-
able future problem areas. Requires term
paper.

R. J. Hansman

16.733 Seminar in Air Transportation
Analysis and Planning

(Same subject as 1.233J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

1-0-5

A review of current issues facing the airline in-
dustry in operational, economic, financial,
regulatory, and institutional areas. Seminars
are presented on alternate weeks by leading
speakers from airlines, aircraft manufacturers,
major airports, regulatory agencies, and nation-
al and international aviation organizations.
Preparatory lectures precede each seminar.
Opportunity for students to conduct studies on
particular topics, with readings guided by staff.
Term paper required.

A. R. Odoni, P. P. Belobaba

16.74 Air Transportation Economics

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces fundamental concepts for the
economic analysis of airline systems. Con-
trasts basic models of the operation of air
transport markets with neoclassical
microeconomic models. Defines market sys-
tems for air transport service, and develops a
theory for pricing, demand, costs, and supply
for regulated and unregulated, domestic and in-
ternational markets. Presents market models
for equilibria in isolated markets and over a net-
work of markets.

P. P. Belobaba

16.75 Airline Management

Prereq.: 16.74
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Overview of airline management problems
focusing on current issues. Development of
planning models and data analysis tools, with
emphasis on the interactions between diverse
components of airline operations, including
fleet planning, demand forecasting, overbook-
ing, yield management, scheduling, and route
network design. Students participate in a com-
petitive airline management simulation game
as part of the subject requirements.

P. P. Belobaba

16.76J Logistical and Transportation
Planning Methods

(Same subject as 1.203J, 6.281, 11.526J,

13.665J, 15.073J)

Prereq.: 6.431, 15.075

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.203J.
A. R. Odoni, A. |. Barmett, R. C. Larson

16.77 Flight Transportation Operations
Analysis

Prereq.: 15.081J
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Studies application of linear programming and

network flow theory to operational problems in
flight transportation systems. Reviews graph
theory. Network flow theory. Integer program-
ming and branch and bound methods.
Dynamic programming. Reviews implementa-
tion of computerized mathematical program-
ming systems. Applies the theory to
scheduling, aircraft and crew routing, timetable
optimization, passenger traffic flow, flight plan-
ning, etc. Students use computer to solve
large-scale problems and for term project.
Staff

16.781J Planning and Design of Airport
Systems

(Same subject as 1.231J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 1.231J.
A. R. Odoni, R. de Neutville

Aeronautical and Astronautical
Systems

16.800J Aerospace Economics

(Same subject as 14.25J)
Prereq.: 14.01

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Applies basic microeconomic theory to
aerospace industries and markets, including
aircraft manufacturing, air transportation sys-
tems, and commercial space ventures.
Focuses on industry structure and firm be-
havior, measures of concentration, regulation,
and government subsidy issues, as well as
cost/benefit analysis. Specific topics include
competition among aircraft manufacturers, im-
pacts of airline deregulation, and evaluation of
large-scale space projects.

P. P. Belobaba

16.82 Flight Vehicle Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of department

U (Spring)

2-3-7

Design of an atmospheric flight vehicle to satis-
fy stated performance, stability, and control re-
quirements. Emphasizes individual initiative,
application of fundamental principles, and the
compromises inherent in the engineering
design process. Enrollment restricted to
seniors in Course XVI who have satisfactorily
completed all other Departmental require-
ments for the S.B. degree, or by permission of
instructor.

M. Drela, R. J. Hansman

16.83 Space Systems Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of department
U (Spring)
4-1-7

Design of a complete space system, including
systems analysis, trajectory analysis, entry
dynamics, propulsion and power systems,
structural design, avionics, thermal and en-
vironmental control, human factors, support
systems, weight and cost estimates. Students
participate in teams, each responsible for an in-
tegrated vehicle design, providing experience
in project organization and interaction between
disciplines. Enrollment is restricted to seniors
in Course XVI who have satisfactorily com-
pleted all other Departmental requirements for
the S.B. degree, or by permission of instructor.
D. E. Hastings

16.840 Real-Time Systems for Aerospace
Vehicles

Prereq.: 16.060, 6.041
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Systems engineering concepts and methods
for aircraft and spacecraft avionics and flight
controls. System architectures and intercon-
nection approaches for critical applications.
Real-time computer systems, software
development, and communication buses and
networks. Analysis of redundant systems with
examples from modern aircraft and spacecraft
systems. Probabilistic methods and modeling
for synthesis and evaluation of system architec-
tures including covariance analysis, hypothesis
testing, and Markov models.

J. J. Deyst

16.851 Satellite Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Fundamentals of satellite engineering design.
Studies orbital environment. Analyzes
problems of station keeping, attitude control,
communications, power generation, structural
design, thermal balance, and subsystem in-
tegration. Considers trade-offs among weight,
efficiency, cost, and reliability. Discusses
choice of design parameters, such as size,
weight, power levels, temperature limits, fre-
quency, bandwidth. Examples taken from cur-
rent satellite systems.

W. M. Hollister

Descriptions of Subjects 461


--- 05.pdf Page 31 ---
School of Engineering

16.861 Engineering Systems Analysis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

R. de Neutville, J. P. Clark, F. Field

16.862 Engineering Risk-Benefit
Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

A. R. Odoni, A. W. Drake, G. Apostolakis

16.870 Aerospace Product Design
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Permission of department
G (Fall)
3-1-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Systems engineering technical and manage-
ment elements used to address the unique
complexity of aerospace products. Require-
ments analysis, functional analysis, and design
trade techniques form the basis for integrated
product-process development best practices.
Project cost and technical control methods ad-
dressed include fault tree analysis, risk
management, and network analysis. Subject
material integrated with special event aircraft,
spacecraft, and systems seminars as well as
case studies prepared by industry and govern-
ment speakers.

C. W. Boppe

16.871 Aerospace Product Design Tools

Prereq.: 16.870
G (IAP)
1-0-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Computer-based tools that support the design
and development of complex aerospace
products are implemented as a basis for
modeling that enhances understanding of prin-
ciples learned in 16.870. Design Structure
Matrix optimization ensures improved process
information flows and reduced cycle time. Ex-
ecutable behavior diagrams or discrete event
simulators assess systems characteristics and
design problems prior to making hardware and
software decisions. Stereolithography
generates preliminary manufactured parts as
well as masters and patterns for castings,
EDM, and vacuum forming using CAD/CAM
solids models.

C. W. Boppe

16.872 Aerospace Design Project

Prereq.: 16.870, 16.871

G (Spring)

1-0-2 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Restricted to Master of Engineering students.
Provides a supervisory framework for the
M.Eng. Design Project and Thesis. Multi-dis-
ciplinary student teams are structured to focus
on design projects recommended by industry
and faculty. Projects address aircraft,
spacecraft, or aerospace product subsystems.
Student-prepared design review presentations
scheduled at several points during the Spring
semester.

C. W. Boppe

16.89 Space Systems Engineering

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
4-0-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Subject defines what a systems engineer
does, and reviews the unifying concepts which
are applicable across many disciplines. Ex-
amples drawn from major national programs
such as the development of ballistic missiles,
Apollo, the Shuttle, Space Station Freedom,
and Patriot. Principles of good practice are
developed and applied to current national
space programs, including the National
Aerospace Plane, the Space Exploration Initia-
tive, and the Mission to Planet Earth. Class
specifies and designs a hypothetical satellite.
D. E. Hastings

Other Graduate Subjects

16.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to an
S.M., M.Eng., E.A.A., Ph.D., or Sc.D. thesis; to
be arranged by the student with an appropriate
MIT faculty member, who is then thesis super-
visor. The M.Eng. thesis is restricted to stu-
dents in the M.Eng. program. Co-registration
with 16.872 is required in the Spring Term.

D. E. Hastings

16.90 Introduction to Computational
Mechanics

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introductory subject in computational
mechanics serving as a prerequisite for ad-
vanced computational fluids, structures, and
propulsion subjects. Includes discretization
methods (finite difference and finite element),
solution methods for elliptic equations (direct
and iterative) and initial value problems (ex-
plicit and implicit). Concepts of accuracy, con-
sistency, stability, convergence, dissipation,
and dispersion introduced. Examples selected
from simple fluids, structures, heat, and mass
transfer model problems (one- and two-dimen-
sional). Emphasis is on mathematical numeri-
cal analysis. Computer assignments requiring
programming.

J. Peraire

16.951 Entrepreneurship

Engineering School-Wide Elective Subject.
Description given at end of this chapter in
SWE section on page 562.

T. G. Gutowski

16.952 Management Topics in Engineering

Directed toward the student whose objective is
a career in engineering leading to manage-
ment. Provides opportunities to examine topics
relating to the conduct of engineering activities
within a total management environment. Inter-
faces between engineering and other com-
pany functions, such as marketing, finance,
manufacturing, quality, explored with em-
phasis on the management process. Special
attention given to the role of technical staff in
the acquisition of new business and long-
range planning. Seminar format based on cur-
rent industrial practice.

J. Yamron

16.954J Research Ethics

(Same subject as 2.953J, TPP.41J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-3

See description under subject 2.953J.
C. Whitbeck

16.97 Advanced Engineering Internship

Prereq.: 16.67

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
0-6-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

A consecutive seven-month period of work ex-
perience as part of the Engineering Internship
Program. Students register for this subject in
two terms, receiving the grade “J” for the first
registration. Limited to students registered in
Course XVI-C who have been admitted to the
Graduate School.

|. A. Waitz

462 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 32 ---
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics Course 16

16.981 Advanced Special Project

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Study, original investigation, or lab project

work of graduate level by qualified students.
Topics selected in consultation with instructor.
D. E. Hastings

16.982 Advanced Special Subject

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

16.983 Advanced Special Subject
Prereq.: —

G (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Organized lecture or laboratory subject, con-

sisting of graduate-level material not available
in regularly scheduled subjects.
D. E. Hastings

16.984 Seminar

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

2-0-0 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Discussion of current interest topics by staff

and guest speakers. Restricted to Course XVI
students.
W. R. Markey

16.985J Proseminar in Manufacturing

(Same subject as 15.792u, 2.890J, 3.804,

10.792J)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 15.792J.
D. B. Rosenfield, J. S. Carroll

Descriptions of Subjects 463


--- 05.pdf Page 33 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

Course 17

Political Science

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Humanities and Social Science.

Political Philosophy/
Social Theory

17.101 What is Politics?
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Subject explores important questions about

what “politics” means and what it is that politi-
cal scientists study by examining critically key
works of such students of politics as Dahl, Mor-
genthau, Arendt, Weber, Plato, Lasswell, and
Wolin. Investigation is intended to provide stu-
dents with a broader and deeper sense of
what politics is, and what political science is all
about.

F. Schaffer

17.105J Political Philosophy

(Same subject as 24.233J)
Prereq.: One Philosophy subject
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

17.106J Political Philosophy

(Same subject as 24.6114)

Prereq.: One subject in Modern Political
Philosophy

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An examination of some fundamental ethical

ideas — natural law, natural rights, equality,
the general welfare, autonomy, and the best
life — and their implications for political
philosophy. Students pursue these ideas by
studying works by a few major political
philosophers: Plato, Hobbes, Locke, Rous-
seau, Hegel, and Marx.

J. Cohen

17.109J Philosophy of Law

(Same subject as 24.235J)
Prereq.: One Philosophy subject
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 24.235J.
J. Cohen

17.110 New Currents in Social Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Subject critically reviews the major theories,

contemporary as well as historical, of freedom,
equality, democracy, property rights, industrial
restructuring, national sovereignty, and interna-
tional relations. Reevaluates common presup-
positions and the relevance of research in
various fields to improving the human condi-
tion.

Z. Cui

17.113J Classics in Political Philosophy

(Same subject as 24.09J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 24.09J.
Staff

17.115J Justice

(Same subject as 24.04J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 2

See description under subject 24.04J.
A. Macintyre

17.116 Cultural Perspectives on Politics
(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Surveys some important ways in which culture

has been conceived by anthropologists, social
historians, and political scientists such as
Geertz, Sahlins, Scott, Laitin, Wildavsky,
Sagan, Said, Hobsbawm, and Obeyesekere;
and investigates how such conceptions have
been used to interpret or explain the political
world. In particular, examines how culture, in
its various incarnations, has figured into ex-
planations or interpretations of charisma, ideol-
ogy, national identity, democratic stability, the
rise of the state, resistance and revolt, and the
functioning of electoral institutions.

F. Schaffer

17.118J Gender, Theory, and Politics

(Same subject as SP.412J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject SP.412J.
E. Wood

Political Economy

17.156J Political Economy I: Theories of
the State and the Economy

(Same subject as 14.781J, 15.678J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Critical analysis of liberal, neoclassical, and
Marxist perspectives on modern society. Alter-
native theories of economic growth, historical
change, the state, classes, and ideology.

M. Piore, S. Berger

17.158 Political Economy of West
Europe

Prereq.: 17.534 or 17.156J

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines role of European states in postwar
period of rapid economic growth and current
crisis. Includes analysis of different state tradi-
tions (“etatist,” liberal, authoritarian);
government's role in decline of some
economies and rise of others; why and where
Keynesianism, indicative planning, and state
enterprises were introduced; alternative con-
ceptions of contemporary economic problems
(new international division of labor? too few
producers? oil shock?); and of policies to deal
with them (industrial policy? monetarism?
protectionism?).

S. Berger

464 Chapter Vill


--- 05.pdf Page 34 ---
Department of Political Science Course 17

17.166 Problems of Advanced Industrial
Societies

Prereq.: 17.156J or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes selected comparative political
economy issues from a variety of different
theoretical and methodological perspectives.
Topics include education reform, welfare state,
industrial relations, and international competi-
tion. Subject aims at developing student
analytic and research skills. Open to qualified
undergraduates by permission of instructor.

R. M. Locke

17.167 Political Economy of Asia

(Subject meets with 17.168)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

17.168 Political Economy of Asia

(Subject meets with 17.167)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Comparative analyses of economic and politi-
cal developments of India, China, Japan, and
Korea-Taiwan-Singapore. Focuses on the
politics of economic planning, relationships be-
tween policy and performance, political and so-
cial consequences of different developmental
approaches, and Asian economics in global
perspective. Graduate students areexpected
to pursue the subject in greater depth through
reading and individual research.

Z. Cui

17.170 The International Politics of
Migration and Refugee Movements

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores the political causes and consequen-
ces of population movements across interna-
tional boundaries. Detailed examination of the
following: the history and contemporary pat-
terns of global migration, the political and
economic consequences for sending and
receiving countries, theories of migrant absorp-
tion, the determinants of exit and entry
policies, the security and stability implications,
the changing role of international legal norms
and institutions, and the moral implications for
public policies.

M. Weiner

17.1723 Technology, Productivity, and
Industrial Competition

(Same subject as 22.843J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 22.843J.
R. K. Lester

17.176J Industrial Development and Policy
Analysis

(Same subject as 11.491J)
Prereq.: 11.205

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.491J.
A. Amsden

17.178J Comparative Organization

(Same subject as 15.234J)

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220 or permission of in-
structor

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.234J.
M. F. Guillén

17.180J Institutions for Industrial
Competition in the Advanced World

(Same subject as 15.235J)

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.235J.
J. N. Ziegler

17.182 Sustainable Development: Theory
and Public Policy

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Examines alternative conceptions and theoreti-

cal underpinnings of the notion of “sustainable
development.” Focuses on the sustainability
problems of industrial countries (i.e., aging of
populations, sustainable consumption, institu-
tional adjustments, etc.); and of developing
states and economies in transition (i.e., manag-
ing growth, sustainability of production pat-
terns, pressures of population change, etc.).
Explores the sociology of knowledge around
sustainability, the economic and technological
dimensions and institutional imperatives. Im-
plications for political constitution of economic
performance.

N. Choucri

17.184J Economic Institutions and Growth
Policy Analysis

(Same subject as 11.486J, 14.778J)
Prereq.: 11.210

G (Spring)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.486J.
A. Amsden

17.186 Institutional Economics: History and
Applications to Comparative Political
Economy

(New)

Prereq.: Previous coursework in political
science or political economy

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9

“Institutional economics” investigates the idea
that competitive markets depend on institu-
tions that are deliberately designed and or-
ganized, rather than arising from spontaneous,
uncoordinated pursuit of profit. Although
recently popularized as the “new institutional
economics,” these themes were analyzed in
detail by early twentieth-century theorists such
as Weber and Veblen. Provides an introduc-
tion to both the old and new institutional
economics, and investigates the implication of
their analyses for the central concerns of com-
parative political economy.

D. Woodruff

See also 17.422.

American Politics/
Public Policy

Public Policy

17.201J Controversies in Public Policy

(Same subject as 11.007J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 11.007J.
L. E. Susskind

17.202 Public Policy: Theory & Practice

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the role of government in address-
ing social problems. When, where, and how
does government intervene to create public
policy? How can we assess the value and ef-
fectiveness of those policies? Students as-
signed specific cases.

S. M. Meyer

Descriptions of Subjects 465


--- 05.pdf Page 35 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

17.205 Health Policy

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Analyzes the health policy problems facing
America including adequate access to care,
the control of health care costs, and the en-
couragement of medical advances. Considers
market and regulatory alternatives as well as
possible foreign models including Canadian,
Swedish, Japanese, British, and German arran-
gements. Emphasis on historical development,
interest group behavior, and organizational in-
fluences in setting and implementing policy.

H. M. Sapolsky

17.207 Race and Science

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Examines comparatively the historical and con-
temporary role of science in constructing
knowledge about human differences in terms
of race. Particular attention is paid to the social
and political context of scientific inquiry and to
its political consequences for public policy.
Considers the role of science in constructing
national identities. Topics include: various na-
tional immigration policies, international
eugenics movement, Nazi science, |.Q. and
educational testing.

M. Nobles

17.208 Comparative Social Policy:
Challenges to the Welfare State
(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Examines current challenges to welfare states
in Europe and the US, including global
economic pressures and their employment ef-
fects, gender, and demographic changes. Ex-
amines responses of European nations and
the US to these problems, including the extent
of marketization or privatization of welfare
state provision and financing. Considers
whether domestic political and institutional fac-
tors produce different responses to such chal-
lenges. Health care and welfare are among
the social policy areas covered.

S. Giaimo

17.209 Race and the American Legal
System

Prereq.: Previous law-related subject or per-
mission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Considers the treatment of race from slavery
to the present, relying on legal materials such
as case law, legislation, and legislative history.
Explores how the legal system has accom-
modated racial difference and racism, and ex-
amines remedies such as affirmative action.
M. Bumham

17.210 Issues in Technology Policy in the
Post-Cold War Era

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9

An overview of the broadening scope of tech-

nology policy, in the areas of health, environ-
ment, and industrial performance. Reviews the
arguments for/against expansion of the scope
of technology policies, particularly in areas
designed to affect industrial performance.
Staff

17.211 American Public Policy for
Washington Interns
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 HASS

Can be repeated for credit

Examines US policymaking process, with spe-

cial attention to making of policy for science
and technology. Spring term attends to origins
and development of American policymaking in-
stitutions and their roles in settling controver-
sial policy questions. Fall term focuses on
development of representative policies in the
US, such as pollution controls, biotechnical en-
gineering, and telecommunications. Must take
two terms for credit.

C. Stewart

American Politics

17.241 Introduction to the American
Political Process

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Studies American national government with ref-

erence to recent political history, emphasizing
the representation of competing interests and
principles in specific policy struggles. Topics in-
clude: the Founding, constitutional interpreta-
tion, legislative processes, Presidential power,
public opinion and voting, group mobilization,
political steering of the bureaucracy and the
economy.

D. T. Kryder, S. Ansolabehere

17.245 The Supreme Court and
Constitutional Law

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Considers constitutional rights, processes, con-

cepts of limited government, civil rights and
liberties, criminal procedure. Focus on
Supreme Court caselaw.

M. A. Burnham

17.251 Congress and the American
Political System

Prereq.: 17.241, 17.201J, 17.301, 17.319,
17.252, 17.273, or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 HASS

17.252 Congress and the American
Political System

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98; Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on both the internal processes of the
House and Senate and on the place of Con-
gress in the American political system. Atten-
tion to committee behavior, leadership
patterns, and informal organization. Considers
relations between Congress and other
branches of government, as well as relations
between the two houses of Congress itself.
Graduate students are expected to pursue the
subject in greater depth through reading and
individual research.

C. Stewart

17.253 American Political Economy

(Subject meets with 17.254)
Prereq.: 17.241

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

17.254 American Political Economy

(Subject meets with 17.253)
Prereq.: 17.241

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of contemporary and historical issues
in US political economy, with special emphasis
on public finance and economic regulation.
Selected topics in trade and tax policy, agricul-
tural, transport, labor, and environmental
regulations, and local public finance treated in
some detail. Focuses primarily on the neoclas-
sical/rational-choice approach; strengths and
weaknesses of this approach are discussed.
Where necessary, devotes time to developing
tools used in rigorous microeconomic analysis.
Graduate students are expected to pursue the
subject in greater depth through reading and
individual research.

J. M. Snyder, Jr.

466 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 1 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

17.205 Health Policy

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Analyzes the health policy problems facing
America including adequate access to care,
the control of health care costs, and the en-
couragement of medical advances. Considers
market and regulatory alternatives as well as
possible foreign models including Canadian,
Swedish, Japanese, British, and German arran-
gements. Emphasis on historical development,
interest group behavior, and organizational in-
fluences in setting and implementing policy.

H. M. Sapolsky

17.207 Race and Science

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Examines comparatively the historical and con-
temporary role of science in constructing
knowledge about human differences in terms
of race. Particular attention is paid to the social
and political context of scientific inquiry and to
its political consequences for public policy.
Considers the role of science in constructing
national identities. Topics include: various na-
tional immigration policies, international
eugenics movement, Nazi science, |.Q. and
educational testing.

M. Nobles

17.208 Comparative Social Policy:
Challenges to the Welfare State
(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Examines current challenges to welfare states
in Europe and the US, including global
economic pressures and their employment ef-
fects, gender, and demographic changes. Ex-
amines responses of European nations and
the US to these problems, including the extent
of marketization or privatization of welfare
state provision and financing. Considers
whether domestic political and institutional fac-
tors produce different responses to such chal-
lenges. Health care and welfare are among
the social policy areas covered.

S. Giaimo

17.209 Race and the American Legal
System

Prereq.: Previous law-related subject or per-
mission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Considers the treatment of race from slavery
to the present, relying on legal materials such
as case law, legislation, and legislative history.
Explores how the legal system has accom-
modated racial difference and racism, and ex-
amines remedies such as affirmative action.
M. Bumham

17.210 Issues in Technology Policy in the
Post-Cold War Era

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9

An overview of the broadening scope of tech-

nology policy, in the areas of health, environ-
ment, and industrial performance. Reviews the
arguments for/against expansion of the scope
of technology policies, particularly in areas
designed to affect industrial performance.
Staff

17.211 American Public Policy for
Washington Interns
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

2-0-4 HASS

Can be repeated for credit

Examines US policymaking process, with spe-

cial attention to making of policy for science
and technology. Spring term attends to origins
and development of American policymaking in-
stitutions and their roles in settling controver-
sial policy questions. Fall term focuses on
development of representative policies in the
US, such as pollution controls, biotechnical en-
gineering, and telecommunications. Must take
two terms for credit.

C. Stewart

American Politics

17.241 Introduction to the American
Political Process

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Studies American national government with ref-

erence to recent political history, emphasizing
the representation of competing interests and
principles in specific policy struggles. Topics in-
clude: the Founding, constitutional interpreta-
tion, legislative processes, Presidential power,
public opinion and voting, group mobilization,
political steering of the bureaucracy and the
economy.

D. T. Kryder, S. Ansolabehere

17.245 The Supreme Court and
Constitutional Law

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Considers constitutional rights, processes, con-

cepts of limited government, civil rights and
liberties, criminal procedure. Focus on
Supreme Court caselaw.

M. A. Burnham

17.251 Congress and the American
Political System

Prereq.: 17.241, 17.201J, 17.301, 17.319,
17.252, 17.273, or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 HASS

17.252 Congress and the American
Political System

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98; Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on both the internal processes of the
House and Senate and on the place of Con-
gress in the American political system. Atten-
tion to committee behavior, leadership
patterns, and informal organization. Considers
relations between Congress and other
branches of government, as well as relations
between the two houses of Congress itself.
Graduate students are expected to pursue the
subject in greater depth through reading and
individual research.

C. Stewart

17.253 American Political Economy

(Subject meets with 17.254)
Prereq.: 17.241

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

17.254 American Political Economy

(Subject meets with 17.253)
Prereq.: 17.241

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis of contemporary and historical issues
in US political economy, with special emphasis
on public finance and economic regulation.
Selected topics in trade and tax policy, agricul-
tural, transport, labor, and environmental
regulations, and local public finance treated in
some detail. Focuses primarily on the neoclas-
sical/rational-choice approach; strengths and
weaknesses of this approach are discussed.
Where necessary, devotes time to developing
tools used in rigorous microeconomic analysis.
Graduate students are expected to pursue the
subject in greater depth through reading and
individual research.

J. M. Snyder, Jr.

466 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 2 ---
Department of Political Science Course 17

17.258 Politics of Race and Ethnicity
in America

(Subject meets with 17.259)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

17.259 Politics of Race and Ethnicity
in America

(Subject meets with 17.258)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

How have racial and ethnic solidarity and con-

flict affected the development of the American
polity since the eighteenth century? Special at-
tention paid to parties and elections, economic
change, repression and violence, and social
movements. Uses comparative perspective
when appropriate. Graduate students ex-
pected to pursue the subject in greater depth
through reading and individual research.

D. T. Kryder

17.260 Graduate Seminar in American
Politics

Prereq.: 17.241

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes the American political system, with

primary emphasis on the national level. Ex-
amines American political culture, federalism,
American party system, representation and
public policy, and major institutional com-
ponents of the national policy process.
Focuses on core works in contemporary
American politics and public policy. Critiques
both research methodologies and the explicit
and implicit theoretical assumptions of such
work.

D. T. Kryder, J. M. Snyder, Jr.

17.261 Congress and the Policy Process

(Subject meets with 17.262)
Prereq.: 17.251

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

17.262 Congress and the Policy
Process

(Subject meets with 17.261)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes the development of the United

States Congress by focusing on the competing
theoretical lenses through which legislatures
have been studies. Particularly compares
sociological and economic models of legisla-
tive behavior, applying those models to floor
decisionmaking, committee behavior, political
parties, relations with other branches of the
Federal government, and elections. Graduate
students expected to pursue the subject in
greater depth through reading and individual
research.

C. Stewart

17.264 Dynamics of Electoral Politics

Prereq.: 17.241 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes mass voting behavior in the US, past

and present. Evaluates leading theories of
American electoral politics in light of inferences
from data analysis. Some comparative
analysis of electoral dynamics and theories of
electoral politics in other Western political sys-
tems. Attention to American voting behavior
since 1960.

S. Ansolabehere

17.267 The President

(Subject meets with 17.268)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

17.268 The President

(Subject meets with 17.267)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9

Examines the US President as constitutional

executive; sharer of governing authority with
Congress and the Courts; party leader; chief
manager of executive agencies; foreign policy
leader; and focus for national political,
economic, and social aspirations. Graduate
students are expected to pursue the subject in
greater depth through reading and individual
research.

D. T. Kryder

17.269 Presidential Elections

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Examines the dynamics of presidential elec-

tions: events preceding the primaries, the con-
duct of the general election itself, and the
policy consequences of the electoral process.
The class conducts a survey of votes. Topics
include the players (candidates, voters, par-
ties, consultants, the Electoral College), cam-
paign resources (money, information, media
attention), the major campaign events
(primaries, conventions, general elections),
and prospects for reform.

S. Ansolabehere

17.275 Social Movements in Comparative
Perspective
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Why do people join mass political organiza-
tions and social movements? What accounts
for the ultimate success or failure of these or-
ganizations? How have social movements al-
tered political parties and institutions? Critically
considers a range of theoretical treatments
and a variety of national cases. Graduate stu-
dents are expected to pursue the subject in
greater depth through reading and individual
research.

M. Nobles

Science, Technology, and
Policy

17.301 Science, Technology, and
American Government

(Same subject as STS.082J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Examines the development of policy toward
science and technology in the US from the
early days of the Republic to the present time,
with emphasis on major issues posed by the
advance of technology. Attention is given to
the policy and budgetary processes of the
government today, selected issues such as
competitiveness and risk assessment, and
policy prospects for science and technology in
the university and in industry.

E. B. Skolnikoff

17.302J Science, Technology, and
Public Policy

(Same subject as STS.524J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the historical development of
science and government in the US, and the
policy process in the Executive Branch and the
Congress that determines Federal policy for
science and technology. Current issues in
science policy are explored and a number of
controversial technology-rich issues are
analyzed, such as economic competitiveness,
risk management, and climate change.

E. B. Skoinikoff

Descriptions of Subjects 467


--- 06.pdf Page 3 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

OO, ——————————

17.319 Environmental Politics and Policy

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Examines the collision of politics, economics,

values, and science in making and carrying out
environmental policy at national, state, and
local levels. Case studies of environmental
policymaking explore the roles of governmen-
tal institutions, business, interest groups, the
public, and the media in areas of air and water
pollution, hazardous waste disposal, public
lands management, and wildlife protection.

S. M. Meyer

17.328J Science and Technology in
International Affairs

(Same subject as STS.525J)

Prereq.: 17.302J or permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the generic relationship between

science and technology and central aspects of
international affairs, including economic struc-
ture, security relationships, and global
dangers. Explores process of interaction, the
nature of changes in the international political
system, and implications for national and inter-
national government. Undergraduates may be
admitted with permission of the instructor.

E. B. Skolinikoff

International Relations/Arms
Control and Defense Studies

International Relations and
Foreign Policy

17.403 American Foreign Policy: Past,
Present, and Future

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Subjects mission is to explain and evaluate

America’s past and present foreign policies.
What accounts for America’s past wars and in-
terventions? What were the consequences of
American policies? Overall, were these conse-
quences positive or negative for the US? For
the world? Using today’s 20/20 hindsight, can
we now identify policies that would have
produced better results? History covered in-
cludes World Wars | and II, the Korean and In-
dochina wars, and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Recent and contemporary crises and issues
also covered.

S. Van Evera

17.405 Seminar on Middle East Politics

(Subject meets with 17.406)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

17.406 Seminar on Middle East Politics

(Subject meets with 17.405)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on evolution of contemporary politics

and economics. Divided into four parts:

1) historical background, 2) domestic and
regional politics of the Arab East, Iran and the
Gulf, the Maghreb, and Israel; 3) energy: the
world oil and energy picture; 4) Middle East
and world politics: geostrategic shifts, Arab-Is-
raeli conflicts and peace process, the Iran-Iraq
war, the Gulf War, and their interaction with
energy issues. Graduate students are ex-
pected to pursue the subject in greater depth
through reading and individual research.

N. Choucri

17.410 Political Economy of Global Change

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9

Tracing the evolution of international environ-

mental issues in political and economic terms,
this subject explores types of human deter-
minants and consequences of global change,
the ranges and types of uncertainties, and the
potential attendant implication for policy. Of
concern are linkages among individuals, na-
tion-states, transnational organizations and
firms, international systems, and global en-
vironments. Special focus is placed on com-
parative public policy for environmental
management, on challenges of sustainable
development, and on evolving modes and
models of international and institutional respon-
ses to global change.

N. Choucri

17.412 Evolution of International
Environmental Law: Implications for
Technology

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9

Graduate-level subject designed as directed re-

search in the general area of international rela-
tions, focusing on issues related to:
international institutions, international political
economy, internal-external linkages, environ-
mental management, and critical potential
trade-offs and their management (such as
trade-environment, security-stability, among
others). Students engage in either a research
initiative or project of their choosing, or on an
issue or problem jointly selected with the in-
structor.

N. Choucri

17.420 Theories of International
Relations

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Critical analysis of contending theories of inter-
national relations. Focus is on alternative his-
torical forms, theoretical assumptions,
analytical structure, and basic core. Compara-
tive analysis of realism(s), liberalism(s),
European, nonwestern, and new emergent
theories. Discussion of connections between
theories of international relations and major
changes in international relations. Open to un-
dergraduates by permission of instructor.

N. Choucri

17.422 Contending Paradigms of
International Political Economy

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Interdisciplinary analysis of ways in which na-
tions undertake dual international objectives:
pursuit of power and pursuit of wealth. Sur-
veys major competing paradigms of interna-
tional political economy, including neoclassical
economics, development and ecological
economics, lateral pressure, dependency and
interdependence perspectives, and structural
views of power relations. Examines political
and economic dimensions of international
trade, capital flows, foreign investment, intellec-
tual property rights, international migration,
and select issues in foreign economic policy.
Examines the evolution of international
economic institutions and attendant political im-
plications. Open to undergraduates by permis-
sion of instructor.

N. Choucri

17.423 Causes and Prevention of War

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Examines the causes of war, with a focus on
practical measures to prevent and control war.
Topics covered include: causes and conse-
quences of national misperception; military
strategy and policy as cause of war; US
foreign policy as a cause of war and peace;
and the likelihood and possible nature of
another world war. Historical cases are ex-
amined, including World War |, World War Il,
Korea, and Indochina.

S. Van Evera

468 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 4 ---
Department of Political Science Course 17

17.424 International Political Economy of
Advanced Industrial Societies

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Seminar provides an overview of international

political economy with specific reference to the
advanced industrial societies. Integrates inter-
national and comparative perspectives and
fuses microeconomic and institutionalist ap-
proaches. Compares and contrasts the role of
states in regulating intergroup conflicts over
domestic markets with the role of regimes in
regulating interstate conflicts over international
markets. Examines the rise and decline of
economic powers, industrial policy and trade
relations, financial and monetary politics, and
economic integration.

K. Oye

17.428 American Foreign Policy: Theory
and Method

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the causes and es of
American foreign policy since 1898. Readings
cover theories of American foreign policy, his-
toriography of American foreign policy, central
historical episodes including the two World
Wars and the Cold War, case study methodol-
ogy, and historical investigative methods.
Open to undergraduates by permission of in-
structor.

S. Van Evera

17.430 Research Seminar in International
Relations

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

While this seminar provides an overview of

recent literature, its principal purpose is to help
graduate students develop skills suited to
production of research papers and/or disserta-
tions. Begins by reviewing general theoretical
and methodological issues, then turns to
specific empirical studies that examine the ef-
fects of systems structure, national attributes,
bargaining processes, institutions, ideas, and
norms on security affairs and political
economy. The last two sessions of the semi-
nar are devoted to evaluating research
proposals generated by all members of the
class.

K. Oye

17.432 Causes of War: Theory and Method

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9

Examines the causes of war. Major theories of

war are examined; case-study and large-n
methods of testing theories of war are dis-
cussed; and the case-study method is applied
to several historical cases. Cases covered in-
clude World Wars | and II. Open to under-
graduates only by permission of instructor.

S. Van Evera

Defense and Arms Control
Studies

17.460 Defense Politics
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines the politics affecting US defense

policies before, during, and after the Cold War.
Includes consideration of intra- and inter-ser-
vice rivalries, civil-military relations, contractor
influences, congressional oversight, and peace
movements in historical and contemporary
perspectives.

H. M. Sapolsky

17.462 Innovation in Military Organizations

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Explores the origins, rate, and impact of in-

novations in military organizations, doctrine,
and weapons. Emphasis on organization
theory approaches. Comparisons with non-
military and non-US experience included.
B. Posen, H. M. Sapolsky

17.468 Foundations of Security Studies

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Aims to develop a working knowledge of the

theories and conceptual frameworks that form
the intellectual basis of security studies as an
academic discipline. Particular emphasis on
balance of power theory, organization theory,
civil-military relations, and the relationship be-
tween war and politics. The reading list in-
cludes Jervis, Schelling, Waltz, Blainey, von
Clausewitz, Brodie, Allison, Steinbruner, and
Huntington. Students write a seminar paper in
which theoretical insights are systematically ap-
plied to a current security issue.

B. Posen

17.471 American National Security Policy

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Introduces the student to the problems and is-

sues confronting American national security
and the process by which American national
security policy is formulated. The nature of the
international system (post-World War II), the
theoretical requirements for deterrence and
defense, and alternative strategies for im-
plementing American national security policy
are discussed. The roles of the President, Na-
tional Security Council, Department of
Defense and armed services, the Congress,
and public opinion in formulating national
security policy are examined.

S. M. Meyer

17.476J Analysis of Strategic Nuclear
Forces

(Same subject as STS.516J)
Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the assessment of strategic nuclear
forces. Emphasizes the development of force
requirements and methods for analyzing alter-
native force postures in terms of missions, ef-
fectiveness, and cost. The history of the
US-Soviet strategic competition provides the
backdrop against which the evolution of
nuclear strategy and forces is considered.

T. Postol

17.477J Technology and Policy of Weapons
Systems

(Same subject as STS.076J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject STS.076J.
T. Postol

17.482J US General Purpose Forces

(Subject meets with 17.483, STS.071J,
STS.532J)

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

2-0-7 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

17.483J US General Purpose Forces

(Subject meets with 17.482J, STS.071J,
STS.532J)

Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Examines the evolving roles and missions of
US General Purpose Forces within the context
of modern technological capabilities and
Grand Strategy, which is a conceptual system
of interconnected political and military means
and ends. Topics include US Grand
Strategies; the organization of the US military;
the defense budget; and the capabilities and
limitations of naval, air, and ground forces.
Also examines the utility of these forces for
power projection and the problems of escala-
tion. Analyzes military history and simple
models of warfare to explore how variations in
technology and battlefield conditions can drasti-
cally alter effectiveness of conventional forces.
B. Posen, T. Postol

Descriptions of Subjects 469


--- 06.pdf Page 5 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

17.484 Comparative Grand Strategy and
Military Doctrine

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A comparative study of the grand strategies

and military doctrines of the great powers in
Europe (Britain, France, Germany, and Rus-
sia) from the late nineteenth to the mid-twen-
tieth century. Examines strategic
developments in the years preceding and
during World Wars | and II. What factors have
exerted the greatest influence on national
strategies? How may the quality of a grand
strategy be judged? Exploration of compara-
tive case study methodology also plays a
central role. What consequences seem to fol-
low from grand strategies of different types?
Open to undergraduates with permission of in-
structor.

B. Posen

See also 17.301J, 17.302J, 17.328J, 17.403,
17.405, 17.406, 17.420, 17.428.

Comparative Politics/
Political Development/
Communist Studies

Theories and Research Methods

17.501 Introduction to Comparative
Politics: Paths of Development
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Investigates the historical origins of major politi-

cal and economic differences among countries
of the world. Questions addressed include:
Why did democracy emerge first, and establish
itself most firmly, in Western Europe and North
America? Why did communism arise in Russia
and China? Why did the Soviet empire break
down? What is so unique about Japan? Why
have certain Latin American and East Asian
countries been so successful in achieving
economic development? Why have African
countries experienced so many coups? Why
are so many countries in Asia, Eastern
Europe, Latin America, and Africa currently un-
dergoing transitions to democracy?

F. Schaffer

470 Chapter Vill

17.510 Language and Politics

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9

Explores language as a medium of both politi-

cal action and inquiry. General discussion of
the nature of language, language change, and
the relations of language to culture. Examines
the ways that literacy and orality affect politics,
and how speaking itself is often a form of politi-
cal action. Investigates how language is used
as an instrument of both domination and libera-
tion, and to both conceal and reveal. Ex-
amines current debates on the structure of
concepts and discusses the implications of this
debate for political research.

F. Schaffer

17.512 Political Culture and Democracy
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9

Explores the strengths and weaknesses of

political culture theory by examining critically
its contributions to the study of democracy. Six
interrelated questions are asked: Are there cul-
tural preconditions for the establishment and
consolidation of democracy? If so, which ele-
ments are most important? How broadly must
these elements be distributed among various
groups and strata of society? Where do
democratic norms come from? How important
is culture relative to other factors? What are
the most important critiques of cultural explana-
tions?

F. Schaffer

17.514 Philosophy of Science and the
Methodology of Comparative Politics
(New)

Prereq.: Graduate work in comparative politics

or permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Offers tools to analyze the philosophical and

methodological issues encountered in design-
ing and conducting dissertation projects in
comparative politics. Topics include: nature of
the scientific endeavor; differences between
natural and social sciences; explanation vs un-
derstanding as approaches to human be-
havior; function of categories in comparative
politics; evolutionary arguments; functionalist
arguments; rational-choice arguments; argu-
ments from small-N comparisons. A number of
empirically-based studies by practicing social
scientists employing various methodological
and philosophical approaches are considered.
D. Woodruff

17.515 Democracy in Comparative
Perspective

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Raises questions about what actually counts
as a democracy and what it means to call a
regime democratic by examining the function-
ing of (arguably) democratic political systems
in a variety of contemporary and historical con-
texts. Case studies drawn from Ancient
Athens, Africa, the Middle East, the Soviet
Union, Europe, and the United States.
Theoretical insight provided by thinkers such
as Thucydides, Rousseau, Marx, Mill, Schum-
peter, Dahl, and Mansbridge.

F. Schaffer

17.516 Retribution and Reparations
(New)

Prereq.: —
G (Spring)
3-0-9

Emerging democracies are now confronted
with what has been termed “the torturer prob-
lem.” The questions are old ones: whatis to
be done about the abuser(s) and what is to be
done for the abused? Seminar broadly ex-
amines the comparative, historical and
philosophical dimensions of the related topics
of retribution, reparation, and reconciliation.
M. Nobles

17.522 Comparative Politics of Race and
Ethnicity

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

Examines the related phenomena known as
“race,” “ethnicity,” and “racial/ethnic” politics.
Particular attention is paid to determining, by
way of competing theories and various nation-
al cases, what makes politics distinctively “ra-
cial and/or ethnic.” Examines first how
theorists approach race and ethnicity; then
analyzes the consequences of racial/ethnic
identification for modern governance and
economic development. Topics include: eth-
nic/racial competition and conflict, electoral
party systems, and race/ethnic target public
policies.

M. Nobles

17.523 Ethnicity and Race in World Politics

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Ethnic and racial conflict appear to be the
hallmark of the new world order. What ac-
counts for the rise of ethnic/racial and
nationalist sentiments and movements? What
is the basis of ethnic and racial identity? What
are the political claims and goals of such move-
ments and is conflict inevitable? Introduces stu-
dents to dominant theoretical approaches to
race, ethnicity, and nationalism, and considers
them in light of current events in Africa,
Europe, and the Americas.

M. Nobles


--- 06.pdf Page 6 ---
Department of Political Science Course 17

17.524 Nationalism

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9

Explores the related phenomena termed
nationalism: national consciousness and iden-
tity, nations, nation-states, and nationalist
ideologies. Analyzes nationalism’s emergence
and endurance as a factor in modern politics
and society. Topics include: nationalism and
the state, class structure, communism,
democracy, and violence.

M. Nobles

17.526 Dissertation Workshop in European
Studies

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 [P/D/F]

Subject is designed for Ph.D. students embark-
ing on dissertation research in the field of
European politics. Aimed particularly at those
in their third or fourth years. Only students who
have passed their General Examinations are
admitted. Subject focuses on issues as-
sociated with designing and undertaking a sub-
stantive piece of research. Begins by
examining a number of examples of success-
ful research with a view to examining how they
were designed, what research problems they
confronted, and how these were surmounted.
In this context, articles on specific methodologi-
cal issues are read. In the second half,
participants’ research proposals are discussed
with an eye to both their substantive and
methodological dimensions.

S. Berger

17.528 Domestic Politics of Trade and
Integration

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes the impact of trade and financial
flows and regional integration on the domestic
politics of advanced industrial states. Pres-
sures for harmonization and convergence of
domestic institutions and practices and the
sources of national resistance to these are ex-
amined. Cases include European Union and
West European states, US and Japan.

S. Berger

See also 17.156J.

Advanced Industrial Societies

17.530J Politics and Enterprise in Europe

(Same subject as 15.231J)

Prereq.: 15.219 or 15.220 or permission of in-
structor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 15.231J.
J. N. Ziegler

17.532 Japan and the New World Order

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Explores Japan’s role in world orders, past,

present, and future, focuses on Japanese con-
ceptions of security, rearmament debates, the
relationship of domestic politics to foreign
policy, the impact of Japanese technological
and economic transformation at home and
abroad, alternative trade and security regimes,
relations with Asian neighbors, Russia, and the
alliance with the United States. Seminar cul-
minates in a two-day Japanese-centered crisis
simulation, based upon scenarios developed
by students.

R. J. Samuels

17.534 Domestic Politics of Western
Europe

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Compares politics and society in France, Great

Britain, Germany, and Italy. Analyzes “cases”
of the integration of feudal remnants and the

problem of controlling the economy. Open to

undergraduates.

R. Locke

17.539 Politics and Policy in Contemporary
Japan

(Subject meets with 17.540)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

3-0-6 HASS

17.540 Politics and Policy in Contemporary
Japan

(Subject meets with 17.539)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes contemporary Japanese politics,
focusing primarily upon the post-World War II
period. Includes examination of the dominant
approaches to Japanese politics and society,
the structure of the party system, the role of
political opposition, the policy process, foreign
affairs, and interest groups. Attention to
defense, foreign, industrial, social, energy,
technology policy processes. Graduate stu-
dents are expected to pursue the subject at
greater depth through reading and class
presentations.

R. J. Samuels

See also 17.156J, 17.158, 17.166J.

Developing Countries

17.541J Introduction to Latin American
Studies

(Same subject as 21F.884J, 21A.224J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

See description under subject 21F.884J.
M. Diskin, E. Garrels

17.543 Political Change in Latin America

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Introduction to the dynamics of political
change in Latin America today. Emphasis on
the conflict between democracy and
authoritarianism, the relationship between
economic and political change, and the
process of empowerment of excluded social
groups. Special attention to Mexico, Central
America and Brazil, economic development,
the environment, ethnicity, the role of women,
and human rights.

Staff

Descriptions of Subjects 471


--- 06.pdf Page 7 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

17.544 Comparative Politics of Latin
America

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Latin American politics in comparative perspec-
tive. Focus on conflict between democracy

and authoritarianism. Case studies of different
political systems and economic policies, espe-
cially in Mexico, Brazil, and Chile. Special at-
tention to regime change, social movements,
and the construction of citizenship. Open to ad-
vanced undergraduates.

Staff

17.547 Chinese Politics and Political
Economy

(Subject meets with 17.548)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

17.548 Chinese Politics and Political
Economy

(Subject meets with 17.547)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analyzes contemporary Chinese politics, both
pre-Communist and Communist. Focus on the
process of modernization and political develop-
ment of Chinese civilization. Graduate stu-
dents are expected to pursue the subject at
greater depth through reading and individual
research.

Z. Cui

17.550J Property Rights Under Transition

(Same subject as 11.467J, 4.257J)
Prereq.: 11.210 or permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 11.467J.
K. R. Polenske

17.558J Political Economy and Technology
in the Middle East

(Same subject as 1.255J, 21H.977J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Provides a focus on, and context for, technol-
ogy change, with specific reference to contem-
porary conflicts and competing ideologies,
Islam and politics, post-colonial experiences,
and patterns of social pressures. Examines
role of technological and scientific institutions.
Changing environment of international busi-
ness is explored, as are patterns of invest-
ments in the region. Provides students with
interdisciplinary approach to development in
the Middle East. Open to undergraduates with
permission of instructor.

N. Choucri, P. S. Khoury, F. Moavenzadeh,

R. Gakenheimer

472 Chapter Vill

17.559J Technology, Policy, and
Sustainability in the Middle East

(Same subject as 1.25J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9

17.560J Technology, Policy, and
Sustainability in the Middle East

(Same subject as 1.256J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Employs historical and contemporary perspec-

tives to analyze the role of religion and politics
in shaping socioeconomic and technological
development in the Middle East. Emphasis is
on the role of the technological change in con-
temporary development (and comparisons
with other regions). Examines institutional
changes within states and throughout the
region for the management of socioeconomic
and technological change, and strategies of
privatization. Focuses on three broad dimen-
sions of statehood: population, resources, and
technology. Examines their interdependence
and the impact of their flows across national
boundaries (i.e., population, migration, technol-
ogy transfer, and energy resources). Graduate
students are expected to pursue the subject in
greater depth through reading and individual
research. 17.559J may not count toward
HASS Requirement.

N. Choucri, F. Moavenzadeh, R. Gakenheimer

17.575 Introduction to Contemporary
African Politics

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Consideration of the general characteristics of

African state structures and political processes
and institutions, as well as of the careers and
programs of particular leaders and of policy is-
sues of widespread significance in Africa
today. Case studies of several African
countries and leaders. Lectures meet with
graduate subject 17.438.

F. Schaffer

17.577 The Politics of Change in the Third
World
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Introduction to contemporary processes of
transformation in the developing world. Special
attention devoted to issues of democratization,
economic liberalization, state-building, and the
changing politics of group identities. The en-
ding of the cold war has affected the pattern of
relationships between less-developed
countries and industrialized nations. Other in-
ternational factors such as the dominant role
of financial agencies and non-governmental or-
ganizations also considered. Assigned read-
ings include selections from the general
theoretical literature as well as country case
studies.

R. Joseph

17.588 Field Seminar in Comparative
Politics: Intellectual Origins, Current Trends
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to the field of comparative
politics for first-year graduate students in politi-
cal science. Taught as an intellectual history
covering the period from the eighteenth cen-
tury to the present.

D. Woodruff

See also 17.168, 17.170, 17.406, 17.438.

Communist Studies

17.601J Soviet Politics and Society,
1917-1991
(Revised Content)

(Same subject as 21H.467J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Explores political and historical evolution of
Soviet state and society from 1917 Revolution
to its demise in 1991: (1) creation of a revolu-
tionary regime; (2) causes and nature of the
Stalin revolution; (3) post-Stalinist efforts to
achieve radical political and social reform; (4)
causes of the Soviet collapse.

E. Wood, D. Woodruff

17.602 Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and
Political Economy

(Subject meets with 17.603)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

17.603 Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and
Political Economy

(Subject meets with 17.602)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Seeks to put today’s radical transformations in
the countries of the former Soviet Union
(primarily Russia) into a historical context.
Begins with review and analysis of main
stages of Soviet development, then explores
topics relevant both to the system’s evolution
and the current political scene. Key topics in-
clude: state power and bureaucracy; politics
and organization of the Soviet economy; role
of the Party; causes of the Soviet collapse;
conceptions of the post-Soviet transition;
politics of economic reform; and center-
regional relations. Additional work expected of
graduate students.

D. Woodruff


--- 06.pdf Page 8 ---
Department of Political Science Course 17

17.614J Russian Science, Technology, and
Society

(Subject meets with STS.021, STS.103J)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9

See description under subject STS.021.
L. R. Graham

Models and Methods

17.801 Political Science Laboratory
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-5-4 Institute LAB

Introduces students to the conduct of political

research using quantitative methodologies.
The methods are examined in the context of
specific political research activities like public
opinion surveys, voting behavior, Congres-
sional behavior, comparisons of political
processes in different countries, and the
evaluation of public policies. Students par-
ticipate in joint class projects and conduct in-
dividual projects. May not count toward HASS
Requirement.

C. Stewart

17.805 Theory of Collective Choice:

Institutions and Positive Political Theory

(Subject meets with 17.806J, 14.296J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

17.806J Theory of Collective Choice:

Institutions and Positive Political Theory

(Subject meets with 14.296J, 17.805)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9

Examines political institutions from a rational

choice perspective. The now burgeoning ra-
tional choice literature on legislatures,
bureaucracies, courts, and elections con-
stitutes the chief focus. Some focus on institu-
tions from a comparative and/or international
perspective. Graduate students are expected
to pursue the subject in greater depth through
reading and individual research.

J. M. Snyder, Jr.

17.808J Theory of Collective Choice:
Empirical Tests

(Same subject as 14.295J)
Prereq.: 17.806J

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focuses on the relationship between the be-

havioral models developed by formal theorists
and the statistical models used in empirical es-
timation. The main questions are: How do re-
searchers make the link between theory and
the data? How do they generate and estimate
statistical models that allow careful testing of
the behavioral models? What constitutes a
good “test” of a model? These questions
studied through reading and discussion of ar-
ticles that combine both empirical and theoreti-
cal analysis.

S. Ansolabehere

17.816 Field Research Methods in
Comparative Politics and Political
Development

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
2-2-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces a variety of approaches and
methods for conducting research in Europe
and in developing countries, including elite in-
terviewing, participant observation, case
studies, electoral analysis, cross-cultural sur-
vey research, and documentary research. At-
tention to conceptual, practical, and ethical
issues of conducting research abroad, e.g.,
the role of language in social research, the
limits and uses of official sources, and ethical
responsibilities of social scientists. Not open to
first-year graduate students.

M. Weiner

17.842 Quantitative Research in Political
Science and Public Policy

Prereq.: —
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to the application of elemen-

tary statistics to political analysis. A basic
literacy subject, teaching the student how to
read and interpret the quantitative literature in
various subfields of political science and public
policy. Students develop elementary statistical
computation skills and learn to use a statistical
computing package.

J. M. Snyder, Jr., S. Ansolabehere

17.844 Categories and Concepts in Political
Science

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9

Examines competing theoretical perspectives
on the formation, function, use, and abuse of
concepts in political science and the social
sciences more generally. Topics include classi-
cal, radial, and family resemblance categories,
neologism, contested concepts, metaphor,
translation, and conceptual stretching and
change. Particular concepts to be analyzed in-
clude freedom, justice, power, and democracy.
Students also analyze the structure of con-
cepts of their choosing.

F. Schaffer

17.846 Multivariate Political Analysis

Prereq.: 17.801 or 17.842 or equivalent
G (Spring)
2-2-8 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Focus on multivariate data analysis proce-
dures, emphasizing regression. Considers
model specification, autocorrelation, instrumen-
tal variables, and causal modelling. Students
must have taken at least one previous subject
in statistics. Open to qualified undergraduates.
S. Ansolabehere

General Subjects

17.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

17.URG Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in Politi-
cal Science in theoretical and applied re-
search. For further information, contact the
Departmental Coordinator.

R. J. Samuels

Descriptions of Subjects 473


--- 06.pdf Page 9 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

17.901 Political Science Internship and
Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

17.902 Political Science Internship and
Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer).
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Independent research enabling students to do
work in an agency, state, or local government,
or other public organization. The academic
component involves close contact between the
student and a faculty advisor and written work.
Work may be done during the summer.

R. J. Samuels

17.903 Community Service: Experience and
Reflection

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Seminar involves students in the community
that exists beyond the labs and classrooms of
the MIT campus. Through a combination of
community service and academic study, stu-
dents learn about political, economic, and so-
cial issues that confront residents in Boston
and Cambridge. Students volunteer in a com-
munity service agency or private organization
devoted to community needs and develop-
ment. Students also responsible for directed
readings, three short writing assignments, and
four evening seminar sessions. Subject can
only be repeated for credit if area of com-
munity service is different.

D. T. Kryder

17.905-17.911 Reading Seminar in Social
Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in the
fields of social science. Open to advanced un-
dergraduates by arrangement with individual
staff members. 17.909 is taught P/D/F.

R. J. Samuels

17.913 Pre-thesis Reading Seminar

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Intensive reading on topics of interest to stu-
dents preparing for senior thesis under
guidance of thesis supervisor. A written paper
required, forming a substantial part of the
senior thesis.

R. J. Samuels

474 Chapter Vill

17.915 Junior Colloquium in Political
Science and Public Affairs

Prereq.: Two Political Science subjects or
permission of instructor

U (Spring)

2-0-10 HASS

Seminar identifies, explores contributions of
political science to critical issues in US and
world affairs. Designed to help departmental
majors and minors understand the way politi-
cal scientists choose and ask questions and
seek answers to those questions. Topics and
readings chosen from fields of comparative
politics, international relations, and domestic
policy.

D. L. M. Blackmer

17.912, 17.914, 17.916-919 Special Topics
in Political Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

17.920 Special Topics in Political Science

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in the
field of social science.
R. J. Samuels

17.ThU Undergraduate Political Science
Thesis

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Program of undergraduate research, leading
to the writing of an S.B. thesis. To be arranged
by the student under approved supervision.

R. J. Samuels

17.950-17.960 Reading Seminar in Social
Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Reading and discussion of special topics in the
fields of social science. Open to advanced
graduate students by arrangement with in-
dividual staff members. 17.959 is taught P/D/F.
R. J. Samuels

17.ThG Graduate Political Science
Thesis

Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research and writing of
thesis; to be arranged by the student with su-
pervising committee.

R. J. Samuels


--- 06.pdf Page 10 ---
Department of Mathematics Course 18

Course 18

General Mathematics

18.01 Calculus

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7 CALC |!

Credit cannot also be received for 18.014 or
18.01A

Differentiation and integration of functions of

one variable, with applications. Concepts of
function, limits, and continuity. Differentiation
rules, application to graphing, rates, ap-
proximations, and extremum problems. Mean-
value theorem. Definite and indefinite
integration. Fundamental theorem of calculus.
Applications of integration to geometry and
science. Elementary functions. Techniques of
integration. Approximation of definite integrals,
improper integrals, and I’Hépital’s rule.

Fall Term: D. S. Jerison

18.01A Calculus

Prereq.: One full year of high school calculus

U (Fall)

5-0-7 CALC |

Credit cannot also be received for 18.01 or
18.014

Intended for students who have a had a full

year of high school calculus. Covers the same
material as 18.01. Taught in the first half of the
Fall term.

A. P. Mattuck

18.014 Calculus with Theory

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

5-0-7 CALC |

Credit cannot also be received for 18.01 or
18.01A

Covers the same material as 18.01, but ata

deeper and more rigorous level. Emphasizes
careful reasoning and understanding of proofs.
Assumes knowledge of elementary calculus.
Topics: axioms for the real numbers; the
Riemann integral; limits, theorems on con-
tinuous functions; derivatives of functions of
one variable; the fundamental theorems of cal-
culus; Taylor’s theorem; infinite series, power
series, rigorous treatment of the elementary
functions.

J. Munkres

Mathematics

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter Vil under the School of Science.

18.02 Calculus

Prereq.: 18.01 or 18.013 or 18.014

U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7 CALC II

Credit cannot also be received for 18.023,
18.024 or 18.02A

Calculus of several variables. Vector algebra

in 3-space, determinants, matrices. Vector-
valued functions of one variable, space mo-
tion. Scalar functions of several variables:
partial differentiation, gradient, approximation
techniques. Multiple integrals with applications.
Vector fields, line and surface integrals, exact
differentials, Green's theorem, Divergence
Theorem, Stokes’s Theorem. Two versions of-
fered Fall Term: 18.02 and 18.02S. 18.02 in-
cludes additional topics in linear algebra.

Fall Term: H. Rogers

Spring Term: Staff

18.02A Calculus

Prereq.: 18.01A

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

5-0-7 CALC Il

Credit cannot also be received for 18.02,
18.023 or 18.024

Covers material taught in the first half of 18.02

(vectors, vector functions of one variable, par-
tial differentiation, multiple integration) in the
second six weeks of the Fall term. Second half
of 18.02A can be taken either during IAP (daily
lectures) or during the first half of the Spring
term.

Staff

18.023 Calculus with Applications

Prereq.: 18.01 or equivalent

U (Fall)

5-0-7 CALC Il

Credit cannot also be received for 18.02,
18.024 or 18.02A

Calculus of several variables. Vector algebra,

analytic geometry, planetary motion, orbit
stability, partial differentiation, functions of
several variables. Taylor series, extremal
problems, numerical methods, multiple in-
tegrals, approximate and asymptotic methods
of evaluation, applications, vector calculus,
gradient, curl, theorems of Stokes, Green, and
Gauss, conservation laws, fluid motion.

A. Toomre

18.024 Calculus with Theory

Prereq.: 18.014

U (Spring)

5-0-7 CALC Il

Credit cannot also be received for 18.02,
18.023 or 18.02A

Continues 18.014. Parallel to 18.02, but ata
deeper level, emphasizing careful reasoning
and understanding of proofs. Considerable em-
phasis on linear algebra and vector integral cal-
culus.

J. R. Munkres

18.03 Differential Equations

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.014

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)

5-0-7 REST

Credit cannot also be received for 18.034

Study of ordinary differential equations. Stand-
ard solution methods for one first-order equa-
tion, including graphical and numerical
methods. Higher-order forced linear equations
with constant coefficients. Complex numbers;
Laplace transform. Matrix methods for first-
order linear systems with constant coefficients.
Non-linear systems; phase-plane analysis.
Series solutions to second-order equations.
Modeling of physical problems and interpreta-
tion of the analytic or graphical solutions.

Fall Term: H. A. Miller

Spring Term: G.-C. Rota

18.034 Differential Equations

Prereq.: 18.024

U (Spring)

4-0-8 REST

Credit cannot also be received for 18.03

Intended as an alternative to 18.03 for stu-
dents who have taken the calculus sequence
18.014/18.024. Covers the same material as
18.03 with more emphasis on theory. First
order equations, separation, initial value
problems. Systems, linear equations, inde-
pendence of solutions, undetermined coeffi-
cients. Singular points and periodic orbits for
planar systems.

Information: R. B. Melrose.

Descriptions of Subjects 475


--- 06.pdf Page 11 ---
School of Science

18.04 Complex Variables with Applications

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8

Complex algebra and functions; analyticity;

contour integration, Cauchy's theorem; sin-
gularities, Taylor and Laurent series; residues,
evaluation of integrals; multivalued functions,
potential theory in two dimensions; Fourier
analysis and Laplace transforms.

Fall Term: H. P. Greenspan

Spring Term: A. Toomre

18.05 Introduction to Probability and
Statistics

Prereq.: 18.01 or 18.013 or 18.014
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 REST

Elementary introduction with applications.

Basic probability models. Combinatorics. Ran-
dom variables. Binomial, Poisson, geometric,
exponential, and normal laws. Statistical es-
timation and testing. Confidence regions. Intro-
duction to linear regression and analysis of
variance.

Fall Term: R. M. Dudley

Spring Term: H. Rogers

18.06 Linear Algebra

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024

U (Fall, Spring, Summer)

4-0-8 REST

Credit cannot also be received for 18.700

Basic subject on matrix theory and linear al-

gebra, emphasizing topics useful in other dis-
ciplines, including systems of equations, vector
spaces, determinants, eigenvalues, similarity,
and positive definite matrices. Applications to
Gauss elimination with pivoting, least-squares
. approximations, stability of differential equa-
tions, networks, linear programming, and
Markov processes. Compared with 18.700,
more emphasis on matrix algorithms and
many applications.

Fall Term: S. Lee

Spring Term: G. Strang

18.062) Mathematics for Computer Science

(Same subject as 6.042J)

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
U (Fall, Spring)

5-0-7

See description under subject 6.042J.
C. E. Leiserson, F. T. Leighton, R. L. Rivest

18.075 Advanced Calculus for Engineers |

Prereq.: 18.03

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

3-0-9 (H except Il, VI, Vill, XII, XIII, XVI, XVIII,
XXII)

Functions of a complex variable; calculus of

residues. Ordinary differential equations; in-
tegration by power series; Bessel and
Legendre functions. Expansion in series of or-
thogonal functions, including Fourier series.

T. Witelski

476 Chapter VIil

18.076 Advanced Calculus for Engineers Ii

Prereq.: 18.04 or 18.075
G (Spring, Summer)
3-0-9 (H except Il, Vi, XVI, XVIII, XXII)

Solution of classical partial differential equa-

tions of science and engineering: curvilinear
coordinates, separation of variables, eigenfunc-
tion expansions. Fourier and Laplace integral
transforms. Quasilinear equations. Charac-
teristics.

Information: A. Toomre.

18.085 Mathematical Methods for
Engineers |

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Review of linear algebra, applications to net-

works, structures, and estimation, Lagrange
multipliers, differential equations of equilibrium,
Laplace's equation and potential flow, bound-
ary-value problems, minimum principles and
calculus of variations, Fourier series, discrete
Fourier transform, convolution, applications.
Fall Term: G. Strang

Spring Term: Staff

18.086 Mathematical Methods for
Engineers Il

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Scientific computing: Fast Fourier Transform,

finite differences, finite elements, spectral
method, numerical linear algebra. Complex
variables and applications. Initial-value
problems: stability or chaos in ordinary differen-
tial equations, wave equation vs heat equa-
tion, conservation laws and shocks, dissipation
and dispersion. Optimization: network flows,
linear programming.

Information: G. Strang.

18.089 Review of Mathematics

Prereq.: —
G (Summer)
Units arranged

Reviews calculus and differential equations.

Primarily for students in Course XIII-A. Degree
credit allowed only in special circumstances.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.093 Tutoring in Mathematics

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.02A or 18.023 or 18.024

U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates who are teaching mathe-

matics recitation. Limited enrollment, based on
positions available. Permission must be
secured in advance to register for this subject.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.095 Mathematics Lecture Series

Prereq.: 18.01 or equivalent
U (IAP)

2-0-4 [P/D/F]

Can be repeated for credit

Ten lectures by mathematics faculty members
on interesting topics from both classical and
modern mathematics. All lectures accessible
to students with calculus background and an
interest in mathematics. At each lecture, read-
ing and exercises are assigned. Students
prepare these for discussion in a weekly prob-
lem session.

Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.098 Independent Activities

Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates desiring credit for studies
or for special individual reading on an under-
graduate level on a P/D/F basis during IAP.
Specific programs and credit arranged in con-
sultation with individual faculty members and
subject to departmental approval.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.099 Independent Activities

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

For undergraduates desiring credit for studies
during IAP or for special individual reading on
an undergraduate level during the regular
terms. Specific programs and credit arranged
in consultation with individual faculty members
and subject to departmental approval.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

Analysis

18.100 Analysis |

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 (H except XVIII)

Two options offered, both covering fundamen-
tals of mathematical analysis: convergence of
sequences and series, continuity, differen-
tiability, Riemann integral, sequences and
series of functions, uniformity, interchange of
limit operations. Both options show the utility of
abstract concepts and teach understanding
and construction of proofs. Option A, offered
first term only, chooses less abstract defini-
tions and proofs, and gives applications where
possible. Option Bis more abstract and for stu-
dents with more mathematical maturity. Places

greater emphasis on point-set topology.
Information: R. B. Melrose.


--- 06.pdf Page 12 ---
Department of Mathematics Course 18

18.101 Analysis Il

Prereq.: 18.100; 18.700 or 18.701
U (Fall)

3-0-9 (H except XVII!)

Continues 18.100, in the direction of manifolds

and global analysis. Differentiable maps, in-
verse and implicit function theorems, n-dimen-
sional Riemann integral, change of variables in
multiple integrals, manifolds, differential forms,
n-dimensional version of Stokes’ theorem.
18.901 helpful but not required.

information: R. B. Melrose.

18.103 Fourier Analysis — Theory and
Applications

Prereq.: 18.100
U (Spring)
3-0-9 (H except XVIII)

Continues 18.100. Roughly half the subject

devoted to the theory of the Lebesgue integral
with applications to probability, and half to
Fourier series and Fourier integrals.

V. W. Guillemin

18.104 Seminar in Analysis

Prereq.: 18.100
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Seminar for mathematics majors. Students

present and discuss the subject matter, taken
from current journals or books. Topics vary
from year to year. Topic for 1996-97: Quan-
tum calculus. Develops quantum calculus with
applications to calculus, combinatorics, num-
ber theory, and statistical mechanics.

V. Kaé

18.112 Introduction to Functions of a
Complex Variable

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
U (Spring)
3-0-9 (H except XVIII)

A deeper and more extensive treatment of
complex variables than 18.04, with more chal-
lenging problems. Mathematical rigor is, how-
ever, not stressed. Branch points and branch
cuts. Cauchy's theorem, singularities,
residues, contour integrals, conformal map-
ping. Schwarz-Christoffel transformation,
analytic continuation, harmonic function, the
Mittag-Leffler theorem.

V. Kaé

18.115 Functions of a Complex Variable

Prereq.: 18.100
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Exponential and trigonometric functions,

Cauchy integral formula, holomorphic and
meromorphic functions. Infinite series and
products, the gamma function. Harmonic func-
tions, conformal mapping, Dirichlet’s problem.
J. Stalker

18.116 Topics in Complex Variables

Prereq.: 18.115

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics vary from year to year. Typical topics:

introduction to Riemann Surface Theory, func-
tion-theoretic and geometric approaches to
Teichmiller theory.

Information: R. B. Melrose.

18.117 Topics in Several Complex
Variables

Prereq.: 18.115, 18.125

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Pseudoconvex domains and plurisubharmonic

functions. Existence and approximation
theorems for holomorphic functions via L-
estimates for the d-operator.

V. W. Guillemin

18.125 Measure and Integration

Prereq.: 18.100
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Compactness, continuity, metric spaces.
Lebesgue measure and integration, product
measures, signed measures, densities. Hilbert
and Banach spaces.

R. M. Dudley

18.126 Functional Analysis
Prereq.: 18.125

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General theory of Hilbert and Banach spaces.

Examples, including Sobolev spaces and L?.
The Fourier transform. Boundedness and com-
pactness of operators. Spectral theory for self-
adjoint operators. Applications to linear partial
differential equations.

K. Liu

18.135 Geometric Analysis

Prereq.: 18.125

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Harmonic analysis on R®. Radon transforms

and applications. Spherical harmonics. Non-
Euclidean Fourier analysis. Paley-Wiener type
theorems, group-theoretic potential theory.
Eigenfunctions, entire functionals, and hyper-
functions.

Information: S. Helgason.

18.152 Introduction to Partial Differential
Equations

Prereq.: 18.100
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Initial and boundary value problems for ordi-
nary differential equations. Sturm-Liouville
theory and eigenfunction expansions. Initial
value problems for the wave equation and
heat equation. The Dirichlet problem for
Laplace's operator and potential theory.

K, Liu

18.155 Distributions and Differential
Equations

Prereq.: 18.103
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Distributions, Schwartz space, tempered dis-
tributions, convolutions and regularizations,
Fourier transforms, Plancherel theorem,
Payley-Wiener theorem; L? Sobolev spaces,
Sobolev embedding theorems, L? elliptic
regularity, compactness theorems; fundamen-
tal solutions, and second-order elliptic
operators.

D. Jerison

18.156 Introduction to Microlocal
Analysis

Prereq.: 18.155, 18.965

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Examines singularities of distributions. Distribu-
tions singular across a submanifold, singular
points of ordinary differential equations, non-
characteristic boundary-value problems. Pseu-
dodifferential operators, regularity of elliptic
differential operators, wavefront set, and
microdistributions. Darboux’s theorem. Hamil-
ton-Jacobi theory.

Information: R. B. Melrose.

18.157 Partial Differential Equations

Prereq.: 18.155, 18.156
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Analysis and geometry of linear and nonlinear
elliptic operators. Basic facts from Riemannian
geometry and elliptic partial differential equa-
tions; variational methods; real Monge-Ampére
equations; global geometric problems as-
sociated with prescribing curvature.

R. B. Melrose

Descriptions of Subjects 477


--- 06.pdf Page 13 ---
School of Science

18.158 Topics in Differential Equations

Prereq.: 18.125

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Introduces a
concept of natural functionals on solutions of a
system of linear PDE and develops integral
geometry from this point of view. Topics: ele-
ments of algebraic theory of D-modules. The
Radon transform. Relation with representation
theory. Integral geometry from the point of
view of D-modules. Admissible families of
curves and Einstein-Weyl 3-folds. Petrovsky
theory of lacunas of hyperbolic equations. Pre-
requisities: generalized functions, elements of
homological algebra.

Information: R. B. Melrose.

18.175 Theory of Probability

Prereq.: 18.125
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Ergodic theorems, laws of large numbers, con-
vergence of probability measures, central limit

theorems, stochastic processes, Brownian mo-
tion, martingales, strong Markov properties.

R. M. Dudley

18.177 Stochastic Processes

Prereq.: 18.175

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

1996-97: Central topic: stochastic analysis.
Emphasis on development and application of
Ito’s theory of stochastic differential equations.
Second half devoted to applications which
derive from differential geometry. Some
knowledge of basic P.D.E. and differential
geometry is recommended.

D. W. Stroock

18.199 Graduate Analysis Seminar

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-21 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Studies original papers in differential analysis
and differential equations. Intended for first-
and second-year graduate students. Permis-
sion must be secured in advance.

R. B. Melrose

18.238 Geometry and Quantum Field
Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Content for
Fall 1996: An introduction to quantum guage
theories for mathematicians. Basic concepts of
path integration and renormalization, detailed
study of two-dimensional Yang-Mills theory.
No knowledge of physics is required but
familiarity with connections, principal bundles,
cohomology theory, and measure theory is as-
sumed.

A. Szenes

18.248 String Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year.
Information: |. M. Singer.

18.276 Mathematical Methods in
Physics

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Recent
developments in physics require mathematical
techniques not usually covered in standard
graduate subjects. Topics for 1996-97: vertex
algebras and conformal field theory.

V. Kaé

Applied Mathematics

18.303 Linear Partial Differential Equations

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Introduces classical partial differential equa-

tions of applied mathematics: diffusion,
Laplace/Poisson, and wave equations. Discus-
sion of their origins and use in discrete random
walks, heat conduction, potential theory, and
waves of small amplitude arising in many
areas of science and technology. Methods of
solution emphasize separation of variables,
Fourier series and transforms, Sturm-Liouville
eigenvalue problems, and the cause-and-ef-
fect insights provided by Green’s functions.
18.04 or 18.112 useful.

D. 2. Freedman

18.305 Methods of Applied
Mathematics |

Prereq.: 18.04 or 18.075 or 18.112
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

18.306 Methods of Applied
Mathematics II

Prereq.: 18.04 or 18.075 or 18.112
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A comprehensive treatment of the advanced

methods of applied mathematics. Fall Term:
asymptotic behavior of ordinary differential and
difference equations; asymptotic evaluation of
integrals; regular and singular perturbation
methods; boundary-layer techniques; WKB
method; multiple scales. Spring Term: partial
differential equations; transform methods; char-
acteristics, initial and boundary-value
problems; Green's functions; singular perturba-
tion problems; nonlinear wave propagation.
18.305: H. Cheng

18.306: D. 2. Freedman

18.307 Methods of Applied
Mathematics Ill

Prereq.: 18.04 or 18.075 or 18.112
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of material from the following topics:
calculus of variations (the first variation and
the second variation); integral equations (Vol-
terra equations; Fredholm equations, the Hil-
bert-Schmidt theorem); the Hilbert Problem
and singular integral equations of Cauchy
type; Wiener-Hopf Method and partial differen-
tial equations; Wiener-Hopf Method and in-
tegral equations; group theory.

H. Cheng

18.308 Wave Motion

Prereq.: 18.305

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics selected according to interests of stu-
dents and lecturer. Possible topics: 1) disper-
sive waves: modulation and average
Lagrangian, group speed, wave action; 2) non-
linear geometrical optics: single and multiple
phase waves, caustics, resonant interaction;
3) hyperbolic waves: characteristics, shocks,
focusing, and reflection; 4) solitons, inverse
scattering, complete integrability; 5) reacting
gas dynamics: flames and detonations, acous-
tic interactions; 6) numerical methods for hy-
perbolic conservation laws.

R. R. Rosales

18.310 Principles of Applied Mathematics

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
U (Fall)
3-0-9

Study of illustrative topics in discrete applied
mathematics including sorting algorithms, infor-
mation theory, coding theory, secret codes,
generating functions, linear programming,
game theory.

D. J. Kleitman

18.311 Principles of Applied Mathematics

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Introductory survey of fundamental concepts in
applied mathematics: propagation, stability,
equilibrium, optimization. This independent
half of the complete sequence emphasizes the
ideas and topics that relate to a “continuous”
mathematical approach: diffusion, waves, in-
stabilities, characteristics, and first-order par-
tial differential equations, with applications to
traffic problems, fluid flow, physics, and biol-

ogy.
R. R. Rosales

478 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 14 ---
Department of Mathematics Course 18

18.312 Algebraic Combinatorics
Prereq.: 18.702 or 18.703

U (Fall)

3-0-9

Applications of linear algebra and group theory

to combinatorics. Topics include matching
theory and extremal set theory, the matrix tree
theorem, enumeration under group action,
coverings and tilings, transfer matrices, and
magic squares. No prior knowledge of com-
binatorics is assumed, though 18.314 is help-
ful.

Information: R. P. Stanley.

18.313 Probability

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
4-0-8

Development of theory and applications of

probabilistic concepts for scientists and en-
gineers. Emphasizes formulation and solution
of probabilistic problems by the algebra of ran-
dom variables. Topics: sample space,
Bernoulli and Poisson processes, uniform
process, generating functions, discrete and
continuous-parameter Markov chains. Intro-
duces the Central Limit Theorem and the foun-
dations of probability.

G.-C. Rota

18.314 Combinatorial Analysis

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Combinatorial problems and methods for their

solution. Enumeration, generating function
techniques, and construction of bijections. Ad-
ditional topics drawn from graph theory, match-
ings and network flows, partial orders,
permutation groups and Polya theory. Prior ex-
perience with abstraction and proofs helpful.

D. J. Kleitman

18.315 Combinatorial Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Topic for

1996-97: Symmetric functions.
S. Fomin

18.316 Seminar in Combinatorics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Readings

from current research papers in combinatorics.
Topics to be chosen and presented by the
Class.

D. J. Kleitman

18.318 Topics in Combinatorics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. 1996-97:

Survey of some algebraic structures that have
been associated with combinatorial structures.
Lattices, matroids and their representations,

categories and grupoids, Hopf algebras, braids.

G.-C. Rota

18.325 Topics in Applied Mathematics

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Selected topics in discrete and continuous ap-

plied mathematics. Topics vary from year to
year. Topic for 1996-97: The probabilistic
method in combinatorics. Topic for 1997-98:
Current developments in mathematical biol-
ogy. Topics might include: fluid mechanics of
locomotion; phylotaxis; applications of reac-
tion—diffusion equations to biology; continuum
models of membranes and DNA. Stochastic
models for motor proteins. Protein folding.
1996-97: D. Spielman

1997-98: M. Brenner

18.327 Wavelets and Filter Banks
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Wavelets are localized basis functions, good

for representing short-time events. The coeffi-
cients at each scale are filtered and sub-
sampled to give coefficients at the next scale.
This is Mallat’s pyramid algorithm for multi-
resolution, connecting wavelets to filter banks.
Wavelets and multiscale algorithms for com-
pression and signal/image processing are
developed. Subject is project-based for en-
gineering and scientific applications.

G. Strang

18.330 Introduction to Numerical Analysis

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Basic techniques for the efficient numerical

solution of problems in science and engineer-
ing. Root finding, interpolation, approximation
of functions, integration, differential equations,
direct and iterative methods in linear algebra.
Knowledge of programming in Fortran, C, or
Matlab helpful.

F. Waleffe

18.335J Numerical Methods of Applied
Mathematics |

(Same subject as 6.337J)

Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06 or equivalent
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

|EEE-standard, iterative and direct linear sys-
tem solution methods, eigendecomposition
and model-order reduction, fast Fourier trans-
forms, multigrid, wavelets and other multi-
resolution methods, matrix sparsification.

A. Edelman, J. K. White

18.336 Numerical Methods of Applied
Mathematics II

Prereq.: 18.330, 18.335, or equivalents
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced introduction to applications and
theory of numerical methods. Solution of dif-
ferential equations, especially of time-depend-
ent partial differential equations by finite
difference and spectral methods. Well-posed-
ness and stability. Fourier analysis. Boundary
and nonlinear instabilities.

M. Brenner

18.337J Parallel Scientific Computing

(Same subject as 6.338J)
Prereq.: 18.06 or equivalents
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Advanced interdisciplinary introduction to
modern scientific computing on parallel super-
computers. Numerical topics include dense
and sparse linear algebra, N-body problems,
and Fourier transforms. Geometrical topics in-
clude partitioning and mesh generation. Other
topics include architectures and software sys-
tems with hands-on emphasis on under-
standing the realities and myths of what is
possible on the world’s fastest machines.

A. Edelman

18.338J Introduction to Numerical
Algorithms
(New)

(Same subject as 6.336J)

Prereq.: 18.03, 18.06 or equivalents
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to theoretical and practical
aspects of numerical algorithms, emphasizing
broadly applicable approaches. Application ex-
amples: problems in circuit analysis; electros-
tatics; mechanical elastostatics. Topics:
equation formulation approaches; linear sys-
tem solution by sparse direct factorization; non-
linear equation solution; Newton's method;
issues of A-stability; local and global error
analysis; solution of elliptic differential and in-
tegral equations; FFT and multipole-ac-
celerated algorithms, more. Alternate years.

J. K. White, A. Edelman

Descriptions of Subjects 479


--- 06.pdf Page 15 ---
School of Science

18.354 Fluid Mechanics
Prereq.: 18.04 or 18.075
U (Fall)

3-0-9 (H except XVII!)

Study of the basic concepts and laws of fluid

motion as illustrated by a variety of readily ob-
servable phenomena and applications in
science and technology: viscosity, vortices,
waves, boundary layers, instability.

H. P. Greenspan

18.355 Fluid Mechanics

Prereq.: 18.354, 12.800, 2.25, 16.121 or

equivalent
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Compact reviews of linear theories in fluid

dynamics: boundary layers; instability; wave
theory; and hydromagnetics. Foundations of
non-linear studies in shear flow, convection,
and vortex waves. Preparation for the more
specialized fluids subjects 18.308, 18.356, and
18.358.

W. V. R. Malkus

18.356 Rotating Fluids

Prereq.: 18.305, 18.354
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

General theory of rotating fluids; transient

flows; boundary layers, nonlinear interactions;
wave motion, stability theory. Application to
technological and geophysical problems.

H. P. Greenspan

18.357 Seminar in Fluid Dynamics

Prereq.: 18.354

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Current developments in the theory and prac-

tice of the centrifugal separation of mixtures
are discussed following a presentation of the
relevant theory of rotating fluids. A seminar for-
mat with readings of published research com-
plemented by laboratory demonstrations.
Information: H. P. Greenspan.

18.358 Hydrodynamic Stability and
Turbulence

Prereq.: 18.354

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Dispersive waves in fluids and instability of

shear flows. Emphasis on nonlinear effects.
Surface waves, internal waves, inertial waves,
waves on thin films. Resonant and long-short
interactions. Solitons and nonelastic solitary
wave interactions. Wave turbulence. In-
Stabilities, bifurcations and generic self-sustain-
ing process in shear flows. Characteristics of
turbulent boundary layers.

F. Waleffe

480 Chapter Vill

18.385 Nonlinear Dynamics and Chaos

Prereq.: 18.03 or 18.034
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces nonlinear dynamics with applica-

tions to physics, engineering, and biology, em-
phasizes analytical methods, examples, and
geometric thinking. Topics: One- and two-
dimensional flows and their bifurcations. Non-
linear oscillators. Chaos. Lorenz equations.
Iterated maps. Period doubling and renor-
malization. Fractals.

R. R. Rosales

18.386 Advanced Nonlinear Dynamics and
Chaos

Prereq.: 18.385 or a solid background in non-

linear dynamics

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics: Melnikov’s method. Conservative

dynamical systems: Kam theorem; averaging.
Applications to biology and physics.
M. Brenner

18.395 Group Theory with Applications to
Physics

Prereq.: 8.321

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Selection of topics from the theory of finite

groups, Lie groups, and group repre-
sentations, motivated by quantum mechanics
and particle physics. 8.322 and 8.323 helpful.
Information: D. Z. Freedman.

18.396J Supersymmetric Quantum Field
Theories

(Same subject as 8.896J)
Prereq.: 8.323

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics selected from the following: 1) SUSY al-

gebras and their particle representations, 2)
Weyl and Majorana spinors, 3) Lagrangians of
basic 4-dimensional SUSY theories, both rigid
SUSY and supergravity, 4) supermultiplets of
fields and superspace methods, 5) renor-
malization properties, and the non-renormaliza-
tion theorem, 6) spontaneous breakdown of
SUSY, 7) phenomenological SUSY theories.
Some prior knowledge of Noether’s theorem,
derivation and use of Feynman rules, |-loop
renormalization, and gauge theories is essen-
tial.

Information: D. Z. Freedman.

Theoretical Computer
Science

18.400J Automata, Computability, and
Complexity

(Same subject as 6.045J)

Prereq.: 6.046J

U (Spring)

4-0-8

See description under subject 6.045J.
N. A. Lynch

18.404J Theory of Computation

(Same subject as 6.840J)
Prereq.: 18.310 or 18.063
G (Fall)

4-0-8 (H except XVIII)

A more extensive and theoretical treatment of
the material in 6.045J/18.400J, emphasizing
computability and computational complexity
theory. Regular and context-free languages.
Decidable and undecidable problems,
reducibility, recursive function theory. Time
and space measures on computation, com-
pleteness, hierarchy theorems, inherently com-
plex problems, probabilistic and quantum
computation, interactive proof systems.

M. Sipser

18.405J Advanced Complexity Theory

(Same subject as 6.841J)
Prereq.: 6.840J/18.404J

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Current research topics in computational com-
plexity theory. Nondeterministic, alternating,
probabilistic, and parallel computation models.
Boolean circuits. Complexity classes and com-
plete sets. The polynomial-time hierarchy. In-
teractive proof systems. Relativization.
Definitions of randomness. Interactive proof
systems and probabilistically checkable proofs.
Approaches to the P = NP? and related ques-
tions.

D. Spielman

18.409 Topics in Theoretical Computer
Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Study of an area of current interest in theoreti-
cal computer science. Topic varies from term
to term. Topic for 1996-97: Algorithmic
aspects of computational molecular biology.
B. Berger

18.410J Introduction to Algorithms

(Same subject as 6.046J)
Prereq.: 6.001; 6.042J

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8

See description under subject 6.046J.
Fall Term: C. E. Leiserson
Spring Term: M. Goemans


--- 06.pdf Page 16 ---
Department of Mathematics Course 18

18.415J Advanced Algorithms

(Same subject as 6.854J)

Prereq.: 18.410J/6.046J or 6.851; 18.06 or
18.700

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasizes fundamental algorithms and ad-

vanced methods of algorithmic design and
analysis. Randomized algorithms. On-line algo-
rithms. Linear programming. Network flows.
Approximation algorithms. Basis reduction in
lattices with applications.

M. X. Goemans

18.417 Introduction to Computational
Molecular Biology

Prereq.: 6.001 or 18.410J/6.046J or permis-

sion of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to computational biology at the

molecular level. Focuses on genomics, protein
folding, and computational models of develop-
ment. Also includes computational approaches
to: physical and genetic mapping, protein struc-
ture prediction, molecular dynamics, virus shell
assembly, sequence homology and alignment,
evolutionary trees, and DNA computing. No
biology background is assumed.

B. Berger

18.419 Seminar in Theoretical Computer
Science

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

A seminar on advanced topics in theoretical

computer science. Current literature presented
by students and instructors with a view toward
preparing students for research in theoretical
computer science, and for developing the skills
needed to present such results effectively.
Information: F. T. Leighton.

18.421 Algorithmic Algebra and Number
Theory

Prereq.: 18.310 or 18.062J/6.042J or 18.701

or 18.703

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9

Review of basic concepts and methods of com-

plexity theory. Existence and construction of ef-
ficient algorithms for classical problems in
algebra, number theory, and logic. Integer and
polynomial GCD computation, algebraic proce-
dures in modular arithmetic, primality testing,
factorization of polynomials over the rationals,
structures and algorithms of recursion theory.
The problem of P # NP. Alternate years.
Information: H. Rogers, Jr.

18.423J Computability, Logic, and
Programming

(Same subject as 6.044J)

Prereq.: 18.062J/6.042J or 18.310
U (Fall)

3-0-9

See description under subject 6.044J.
A. R. Meyer

18.425J Cryptography and
Cryptanalysis

(Same subject as 6.875J)

Prereq.: 6.046J/18.410J or 6.851 or 18.421
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.875J.
S. Goldwasser

18.426) Advanced Topics in
Cryptography

(Same subject as 6.876J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

See description under subject 6.876J.
S. Goldwasser

18.433 Combinatorial Optimization and
Linear Programming

Prereq.: 18.06 or 18.700, 18.310
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9

A thorough treatment of linear programming

theory, Dantzig’s simplex method, and duality
theory. Matroid optimization, the assignment
problem, the maximum flow problem. Ap-
proximation algorithms for combinatorial op-
timization. Ellipsoid method and its
implications for combinatorial optimization.
Polyhedral approaches to NP-complete
problems.

Information: M. X. Goemans.

18.435J Theory of Parallel and VLSI
Computation

(Same subject as 6.848J)
Prereq.: 6.046J/18.410J or 6.851
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces parallel computation and very large

scale integration. Design and analysis of sys-
tolic algorithms for routing, sorting, arithmetic,
and graph problems on arrays, trees, hyper-
cubes, and other fixed-connection networks.
Network transformations, broadcast simula-
tion, retiming. Packet routing and nonblocking
networks. Mathematical models of hardware.
Lower bounds, P-completeness, area-time
trade-offs. Layout, placement, routing. 3-D
models, volume/area universal networks, fat-
trees. Parallel programming on a connection
machine. Survey of other parallel architectures.
F. T. Leighton

18.437J Distributed Algorithms

(Same subject as 6.852J)
Prereq.: 6.046J

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

See description under subject 6.852J.
N. A. Lynch

Applied Mathematics:
Statistics

18.440 Probability and Random Variables
(Revised Units)

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Topics in applications. Probability spaces, ran-
dom variables, distribution functions, expected
value. Binomial, geometric, hypergeometric,
Poisson distributions. Uniform, exponential,
normal, gamma and beta distributions. Mean,
variance, moments, and generating functions.
Conditional probability, Bayes theorem, joint
distributions, and distributions of transformed
random variables. Tchebychev inequality, law
of large numbers, and central limit theorem.

D. W. Stroock

18.441 Statistical Inference

Prereq.: 18.440 or 18.313 or 6.041
U (Spring)
3-0-9 (H except XVIII)

Reviews probability and introduces statistical
inference. Point and interval estimation. The
maximum likelihood method. Hypothesis test-
ing. Likelihood-ratio tests and Bayesian
methods. Nonparametric methods. Analysis of
variance, regression analysis and correlation.
Chi-square goodness of fit tests. More theoreti-
cal than 18.443 and more detailed in its treat-
ment of statistics than 18.05.

A. Sarkar

18.443 Statistics for Applications

Prereq.: 18.440 or 18.313 or 6.041
U (Fall)
3-0-9 (H except XVIII)

A broad treatment of statistics, concentrating
on specific statistical techniques used in
science and industry. Topics: hypothesis test-
ing and estimation. Confidence intervals, chi-
square tests, nonparametric statistics, analysis
of variance, regression, time series, and ex-
perimental design. Treatment more oriented
toward application and less toward theory than
18.441.

S. Fomin

Descriptions of Subjects 481


--- 06.pdf Page 17 ---
School of Science

18.445 Introduction to Stochastic
Processes

Prereq.: 18.313 or 18.440 or 6.041
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the theory and application of
stochastic processes. Empirical phenomena
for which stochastic processes provide
models. Markov-chains. Markov processes.
Renewal theory. Semi-Markov processes.
Queueing theory and Brownian motion.
Information: R. M. Dudley.

18.446 Applied Time-Series Analysis

Prereq.: 15.075 or 18.441 or 18.443
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Statistical methods commonly used to analyze
time series. Topics: Trends and seasonality.
Autocorrelation and stationarity. Models for sta-
tionary series. ARIMA models. Model specifica-
tion, parameter estimation, and model
checking. Forecasting. Seasonal time series
models. Intervention analysis and outlier detec-
tion. Fourier analysis and estimation of the
spectrum. Cross-correlation and bivariate time
series models. Multiple time series and vector
ARIMA models.

Information: R. M. Dudley.

18.457 Sampling, Simulation, and
Monte Carlo

(18.454)

Prereq.: 18.440 or 18.313 or 6.041
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics selected from the following: design and
analysis of sample surveys, resampling
methods in statistical inference, random num-
bers and stochastic simulation, Monte Carlo in-
tegration and optimization, and Markov chain
Monte Carlo.

A. Sarkar

18.458 Robust Statistics and
Nonparametric Methods

Prereq.: 15.075 or 18.441 or 18.443; 18.440
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Nonparametric methods that give useful and
valid results under a very wide class of underly-
ing distributions. Introduction to robust statisti-
cal theory. Topics: Wilcoxon test, sign test,
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test, U-statistics
theorems. Asymptotic relative efficiency of es-
timators. Kruskal-Wallis test. Robust es-
timators of location.

Information: R. M. Dudley.

18.465 Topics in Statistics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics selected from recent literature. 1996—

97: Topics in modern regression. Linear, non-
linear, generalized, and nonparametric
methods for regression with one or many
covariates. Unifying themes include diagnos-
tics, model selection, and prediction. Recent
developments including use of neural net-
works and wavelets.

A. Sarkar

18.466 Mathematical Statistics

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Decision theory, estimation, confidence inter-

vals, hypothesis testing. Introduces large
sample theory. Asymptotic efficiency of es-
timates. Exponential families. Sequential
analysis.

Information: R. M. Dudley.

For additional related subjects in Statistics,
see:

Civil and Environmental Engineering: 1.03,
1.151, 1.155, 1.202, 1.203J, 1.205, and 1.732

Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science: 6.041, 6.231, 6.245, 6.262, 6.264J,
6.430J, 6.431, 6.432, and 6.435

Management: 15.034, 15.061, 15.065,
15.070, 15.074, 15.075, 15.076, 15.078,
15.098, 15.306, and 15.832

Mathematics: 18.05, 18.175, 18.177, 18.313,
18.440, 18.441, 18.443, 18.445, 18.446,
18.457, 18.458, 18.465, and 18.466

See also: 2.061, 2.830, 2.870, 5.70, 5.72,
7.02, 8.044, 8.08, 10.816, 11.220, 11.221,
16.322, 17.842, 17.846, 22.38, HST.191, and
MAS.622J.

Logic

18.504 Seminar in Logic

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9

Seminar for mathematics majors. Students

present and discuss the subject matter taken
from current journals or books. Topics vary
from year to year.

Information: S. D. Friedman.

18.510 Introduction to Mathematical Logic
and Set Theory

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9

Credit cannot also be received for 18.511

Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. Ordinals and car-
dinals. Axiom of choice and transfinite induc-
tion. Propositional and predicate logic.
Elementary model theory: completeness, com-
pactness, and Lowenheim-Skolem theorems.
Gédel incompleteness theorem. 18.510 and
18.511 are offered in alternate years; they may
not both be taken for credit.

S. D. Friedman

18.511 Introduction to Mathematical Logic
and Recursion Theory

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

3-0-9

Credit cannot also be received for 18.510

Propositional and predicate logic. Elementary
model theory: completeness, compactness,
and Lowenheim-Skolem theorems. Elemen-
tary recursion theory: enumeration and recur-
sion theorems. Post's Problem. Gédel
incompleteness theorem. 18.511 and 18.510
are offered in alternate years; they may not
both be taken for credit.

Information: G. E. Sacks.

18.515 Mathematical Logic

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

First-order logic. Compactness and
ultraproducts. Lowenheim-Skolem theorems
and categoricity. Quantifier elimination. Recur-
sively enumerable sets and definability in arith-
metic. Incompleteness and undecidability.

S. D. Friedman

18.535 Graduate Logic Seminar

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Students report on fundamental papers in
mathematical logic. Open to all graduate stu-
dents with an interest in logic. Topics vary from
year to year.

Information: S. D. Friedman.

18.565 Recursion Theory

Prereq.: Permission of Instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics in recursion theory chosen from priority
arguments, hyperarithmetic theory, ordinal
recursion, E-recursion, theory of projective
sets. A previous subject in logic recommended
but not required.

G. E. Sacks

482 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 18 ---
Department of Mathematics Course 18

18.575 Model Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics in model theory chosen from stability

theory, O-minimal structures, model-theoretic
algebra, models of arithmetic.
Information: S. D. Friedman.

18.585 Set Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics in set theory chosen from large car-

dinals, combinatorial set theory, forcing,
descriptive set theory, fine structure theory.
S. D. Friedman

Algebra and Number
Theory

18.700 Linear Algebra

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.02A or 18.023 or 18.024

U (Fall)
3-0-9 REST
Credit cannot also be received for 18.06

A rigorous treatment of linear algebra, includ-

ing vector spaces, systems of linear equations,
bases, linear independence, matrices, deter-
minants, eigenvalues, inner products, quad-
ratic forms, and canonical forms of matrices.
Compared with 18.06, more emphasis on
theory and proofs.

T. Pantev

18.701 Algebra |

Prereq.: 18.700 or 18.100B or permission of in-

structor
U (Fall)
3-0-9

18.702 Algebra Il

Prereq.: 18.701
U (Spring)
3-0-9

More extensive and theoretical than the
18.700—18.703 sequence. Experience with
proofs helpful. First term: group theory,
geometry, and linear algebra. Second term:
tings and fields — ideals, polynomial rings, fac-
torization, modules, Jordan form for matrices,
extension fields, Galois theory.

D. A. Vogan

18.703 Modern Algebra

Prereq.: 18.02 or 18.023 or 18.024
U (Spring)
3-0-9

A one-term treatment, covering the traditional

algebra topics that have found greatest ap-
plication in science and engineering as well as
in mathematics: group theory, emphasizing
finite groups; ring theory, including ideals,
unique factorization in polynomial and
Euclidean rings; field theory, including proper-
ties and applications of finite fields. 18.700 and
18.703 together form a standard algebra se-
quence.

G. Lusztig

18.704 Seminar in Algebra and Number
Theory

Prereq.: One subject in linear algebra and

some experience with proofs
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9

Seminar for mathematics majors. Students

present and discuss the subject matter, taken
from current journals or books. Topics may
vary from year to year.

Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.705 Commutative Algebra

Prereq.: 18.701—18.702 or 18.700—18.703

G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Basic topics in commutative algebra: localiza-

tion, primary decomposition, integral depend-
ence, filtrations, flatness, completions, and
dimension theory.

G. Lusztig

18.706 Noncommutative Algebra

Prereq.: 18.705

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Wedderburn theory, Artinian algebras, tensor

products, cohomology, central simple al-
gebras, Jacobson density theorem, double
centralizer theorem, Noether-Skolem theorem,
Brauer groups, Galois cohomology, crossed
product algebras, division algebras over local
fields.

Information: G. Lusztig.

18.715 Topics in Homological Algebra

Prereq.: 18.705 or 18.905

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics vary from year to year. Topic for 1996—

97: Topological cyclic homology.
L. Hesselholt

18.725 Algebraic Geometry

Prereq.: 18.705

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduces the basic notions and techniques of
modern algebraic geometry: schemes, maps,
products, representable functors, and sheaf

cohomology.
S. Kovacs

18.727 Topics in Algebraic Geometry

Prereq.: 18.725

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics vary from year to year. Topic for 1996—
97: Higher dimensional complex geometry.
Birational geometry of threefolds, Mori's
theory, basic theorems of the Minimal Model
Program, analogy with the classification of sur-
faces,

S. Kovacs

18.735 Topics in Algebra

Prereq.: 18.702 or 18.703

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Topics vary from year to year.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.737 Quantum Groups

Prereq.: 18.705

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Main objective is the construction of semi-
simple groups and their generalization, the
quantum groups, via the theory of quivers. No
preliminaries in Lie groups or Lie algebras re-
quired. Good background in abstract algebra
useful.

Information: G. Lusztig.

18.739 Theory of Invariants

Prereq.: 18.705

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Hilbert's finiteness theorem for reductive
groups. Properties of the orbits and the orbit
space. Classical invariants theory. Hilbert-
Mumford-Richardson theorem. Rosenlicht’s
theorem on the existence of invariants. Mat-
sushima criterion. Richardson's theorem on
the principal stabilizer. Chevalley-Luna-
Richardson theorem. Linear actions with a non-
trivial stabilizer. Nice representations. Methods
of the orbit classification. Applications to classi-
cal problems of linear algebra. Other topics.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

Descriptions of Subjects 483


--- 06.pdf Page 19 ---
School of Science

ee

18.745 Introduction to Lie Algebras

Prereq.: 18.701 or 18.703
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Emphasizes theory of Lie algebras and al-
gebraic aspects of Lie theory. Structure of
finite-dimensional Lie algebras; Engel and Lie
theorems, Cartan subalgebras, Cartan
criterion. Structure and classification of semi-
simple Lie algebras. Lie algebra cohomology;
Weyl and Levi theorems. Finite-dimensional
representations of semi-simple Lie algebras,
Weyl character formula. Verma modules.

G. Lusztig

18.747 Infinite-dimensional Lie Algebras

Prereq.: 18.745

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Topics vary from year to year. Representation

theory of affine algebras and superalgebras
and of superconformal algebras. Modular in-
variance and fusion rules. Vertex operator al-
gebras.

Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.755 Introduction to Lie Groups
Prereq.: 18.100, 18.700

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A general introduction to manifolds and Lie

groups. The role of Lie groups in mathematics
and physics. The exponential mapping. Cor-
respondence with Lie algebras. Homogeneous
spaces and transformation groups. Adjoint rep-
resentation. Compact Lie groups. Structure
theory and elementary representation theory.
P. Pandzié

18.756 Analysis on Lie Groups

Prereq.: Elementary knowledge of Lie groups

and manifold theory

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

The wave equation in Euclidean space with

geometric and physical interpretation of the
solution. Hadamard’s theory of second order
hyperbolic equations with emphasis on
Huygens’ principle and conformal transforma-
tions. Solution in spaces of constant curvature
(Riemannian and Lorentzian) obtained by
means of Radon transform and orbital in-
tegrals. Hadamard’s problem in symmetric
spaces, also for multi-temporal wave equa-
tions.

S. Helgason

18.757 Representations of Lie Groups

Prereq.: 18.755

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

An introduction to representation theory of lo-

cally compact groups, with emphasis on com-
pact groups and abelian groups. Peter-Weyl
theorem and Cartan-Weyl highest weight
theory for compact Lie groups.

Information: D. A. Vogan.

18.758 Representations of Lie Groups

Prereq.: 18.757
G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Introduction to D-module approach to repre-
sentation theory of semi-simple Lie groups.
P. Pandzié

18.769 Topics in Lie Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

eral do sitet ine ea EbstdbaceelSTOR men
Topics vary from year to year. Topic for 1996—
97: Tensor categories.

A. Kirillov

18.775 Algebraic Number Theory

Prereq.: 18.702

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Fall)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

18.776 Algebraic Number Theory

Prereq.: 18.775

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

18.775: The p-adic numbers. Number fields,
rings of integers, valuations. Ramification, dif-
ferent and discriminant. Finiteness of ideal
Class groups. Zeta-function; units and Dirichlet
theorem on regulators. Quadratic reciprocity
law, cyclotomic fields and decomposition laws.
Computation of class numbers of quadratic
fields. 18.776: Division algebras and Brauer
group. Local and global class field theory, in-
cluding the cohomological approach and Lubin-
Tate theory. Weil group. Tate’s duality.
Information: A. A. Beilinson.

18.781 Theory of Numbers

Prereq.: 18.701 or 18.703
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Primes, congruences, quadratic reciprocity,
and arithmetic functions. Distribution of primes,
Euler's zeta function and its values at even in-
tegers. Irrationality of e and pi. P-adic num-
bers. Diophantine equations, rational
approximations, and continued fractions.
Kronecker’s theorem. The geometry of num-
bers. Quadratic forms and quadratic number
fields.

A. Goncharov

18.785 Analytic Number Theory

Prereq.: 18.115

Acad Year 1996-97: G (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

A historical approach to analytic number
theory. Riemann hypothesis, Goldbach’s con-
jecture, the k-tuple conjecture, Cramer's con-
jecture, Waring’s problem, Lindelof’s
hypothesis, the class number problem, Siegel
zeros, Vinogradov's hypothesis, Artin’s conjec-
ture, the Linnik-Selberg conjecture, their in-
fluence on the development of analytic number
theory.

A. Zaharescu

18.786 Topics in Number Theory

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: G (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Topic for
1996-97: L-functions and motives.
A. Goncharov

18.795 Multilinear Algebra

Prereq.: 18.700 or 18.701 or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Can be repeated for credit

Intensive introduction to the basic concepts of
multilinear algebra that are required for the fur-
ther study of combinatorics, topology, al-
gebraic topology, and Lie theory. Tensor
algebras, exterior algebra, Clifford algebra, rep-
resentations of the symmetric and general
linear group, finer theory of Young sym-
metrizers, basic notions of Hopf algebra, intro-
duction to supersymmetric algebra.
Information: G.-C. Rota.

Topology and Geometry

18.901 Introduction to Topology

Prereq.: 18.100
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 (H except XVIII)

Introduces topology, covering topics fundamen-
tal to modern analysis and geometry. Topologi-
cal spaces, connectedness, compactness,
continuous functions, separation axioms, func-
tion spaces. Metrization theorems, the
Tychonoff theorem.

Fall Term: J. R. Munkres

Spring Term: F. P. Peterson

484 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 20 ---
Department of Mathematics Course 18

18.904 Seminar in Topology

Prereq.: 18.901
U (Spring)
3-0-9

Seminar for mathematics majors. Students

present and discuss the subject matter, taken
from current journals or books. Topics may
vary from year to year. Topics for 1996-97:
Fundamental group and covering spaces.

J. R. Munkres

18.905 Algebraic Topology
Prereq.: 18.702 or 18.705; 18.901
G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
18.906 Algebraic Topology
Prereq.: 18.905

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Simplicial and singular homology, Eilenberg-

Steenrod axioms. Cohomology ring, universal
coefficient theorem, Kinneth theorem, plus ad-
ditional toipcs to be chosen by the instructor
(such as homotopy theory, duality in

manifolds, vector bundles).

F. P. Peterson

18.915 Graduate Topology Seminar

Prereq.: 18.906
G (Fall)
3-0-21 H-LEVEL Grad Credit

Study and discussion of important original

papers in the various parts of algebraic and dif-
ferential topology. Open to all students who
have had 18.906 or the equivalent, not only
prospective topologists.

M. J. Hopkins

18.917 Topics in Algebraic Topology

Prereq.: 18.906

G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. Topics may

include: cohomology operations, homotopy
theory, K-theory, cobordism theory, stable
homotopy theory, localization, mapping
spaces.

H. R. Miller

18.950 Differential Geometry

Prereq.: 18.100, 18.901
U (Spring)
3-0-9

An introduction to differential geometry, with

emphasis on curves and surfaces. Frenet for-
mulas, fundamental forms, curvature, Gauss’
theorem, geodesics, Riemannian manifolds.
18.901 is required, but may be taken concur-
rently. 18.101 is strongly recommended but
not required.

S. Axelrod

18.965 Geometry of Manifolds 18.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: 18.101 Prereq.: —

G (Fall) G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit

18.966 Geometry of Manifolds Canberepeatedtorcredit
7 Program of graduate research, leading to the

otc si writing of a Ph.D. thesis; to be arranged by the

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit rs and an appropriate MIT faculty mem-
Differentiable manifolds, vector fields and
forms, introduction to Lie groups, the DeRham
theorem, Riemannian manifolds. 18.966 con-
tinues 18.965. Focuses on global differential
geometry, curvature and topology. Heat ker-
nels and index theorems also discussed.

G. Tian

18.969 Topics in Geometry

Prereq.: 18.966

G (Fall)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year. 1996-97:
Continuation of 18.966. Topics include mo-
ment maps and moment polytopes, symplectic
reduction, geometric quantization via polariza-
tions and spin-C structures, and the “quantiza-
tion commutes with reduction” theorem.
Applications of the techniques of this course to
representation theory and combinatorics also
discussed.

V. W. Guillemin

18.979 Graduate Geometry Seminar
(New)

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
G (Spring)

3-0-9 H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Content varies from year to year.
Information: R. B. Melrose.

18.999 Mathematical Reading

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)
Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Reading of advanced mathematical treatises
under supervision of a member of the Depart-
ment. For graduate students desiring ad-
vanced work not provided in regular subjects.
D. A. Vogan

18.UR Undergraduate Research

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

Undergraduate research opportunities in math-
ematics. Permission required in advance to
register for this subject. For further information,
consult the Departmental Coordinator.
Information: D. A. Vogan.

Descriptions of Subjects 485


--- 06.pdf Page 21 ---
School of Science

Course 20 Program in Applied
Biological Sciences

20.921 Selected Topics in Applied
Biological Sciences

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Detailed discussion of selected topics of cur-
rent interest. Classwork in various fields not
covered by regular subjects.

Staff

20.ThG Graduate Thesis

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring, Summer)

Units arranged H-LEVEL Grad Credit
Can be repeated for credit

Program of graduate research, leading to the
writing of an S.M. or Ph.D. thesis; to be ar-
ranged by the student and appropriate MIT
faculty member.

P. C. Dedon

486 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 22 ---
Anthropology Course 21A

Course 21

Anthropology (21A)

Foreign Languages and Literatures (21F)
History (21H)

Literature (21L)

Music and Theater Arts (21M)

Program in Writing and

Humanistic Studies (21W)

To register for individual research or thesis
in a specific humanities section, see the
end of the section’s subject listing below.

21.UR Research in Humanities

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged [P/D/F]
Can be repeated for credit

21.URG Research in Humanities

Prereq.: —

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Individual participation in an ongoing research

project. For students in the Undergraduate Re-
search Opportunities Program.
Consult P. S. Khoury.

21.ThT Humanities Pre-Thesis Tutorial

Prereq.: As specified for particular field
U (Fall, Spring)

1-0-5

Can be repeated for credit

Definition of and early-stage work on thesis

project leading to 21 ThU Undergraduate
Thesis in Humanities. Taken during the first
term of the student’s two-term commitment to
the thesis project. Student works closely with
an individual faculty tutor. Required for all stu-
dents in Course XXI, and those doing XXI-E
and XXI-S degrees, for whom the thesis is a
degree requirement.

P. S. Khoury

21.ThU Undergraduate Thesis in Humanities

Prereq.: 21 ThT

U (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Completion of work on the senior major thesis

under supervision of a faculty tutor. Includes
oral presentation of thesis progress early in the
term, assembling and revising the final text,
and meeting at the close with a committee of
faculty evaluators to discuss the successes
and limitations of the project. Required for
most students in Course XXI and those doing
XXI-E and XXI-S degrees. (See degree re-
quirements in specific fields.)

P. S. Khoury

Humanities

For degree requirements, see listing in
Chapter VII under the School of
Humanities and Social Science.

Anthropology

Consult Anthropology Headquarters, 20B-131,
for the most up-to-date information about
requirements and subject offerings.

The anthropology subjects described

below are grouped within five areas: Intro-
ductory, Social Anthropology, Technology
in Cultural Context, Culture History, and Ad-
vanced Topics. Students are encouraged to
take subjects from each of the first four
groups for a fuller overview of the field.

Introductory

21A.100 Introduction to Anthropology

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

What kinds of wisdom do other ways of life

offer our own? How do other perspectives on
the world challenge our assumptions about
life? These questions are addressed through
the four fields of anthropology: biological, cul-
tural, and linguistic anthropology, and archaeol-
ogy. We examine family and kinship, religion,
economics, politics, survival of indigenous
groups, and Western influences from an
anthropological perspective to gain apprecia-
tion for cultural and ethnic diversity.

M. Diskin

21A.109 Understanding Culture

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Students are introduced to anthropological

fieldwork and the concept of culture from read-
ings, films, and their own research projects in
the Boston area. A “hands-on” approach to un-
derstanding cultural differences and what
produces them. Students discover the excite-
ment and challenges of systematically observ-
ing human interaction and convincing others of
the accuracy of their findings.

J. Jackson

21A.110 Seminar in Anthropological Method
and Theory

Prereq.: Major or minor in Anthropology, or
permission of instructor

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Seminar focusing on core issues and ap-
proaches in anthropological theory and
method. Theoretical frameworks for the
analysis and integration of material from other
subjects in cultural anthropology.

Consult J. Howe.

21A.112 Tutorial for Majors and Minors in
Anthropology

Prereq.: Major or minor in Anthropology
U (Fall, Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Reading and discussion subject. Each student
meets regularly with tutor to discuss readings.
Grounding in fundamentals of anthropology
and integration of other coursework in field.
Consult J. Howe.

Social Anthropology

21A.211 Magic, Witchcraft, and the Spirit
World

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Spiritual, magical, and “occult” aspects of
human behavior in anthropological and histori-
cal perspective: divination and other forms of
magic, ritual curing, trance, spirit possession,
sorcery, and accusations of witchcraft. Material
drawn from traditional non-western societies,
medieval and early modern Europe, and
colonial and contemporary North America.

J. Howe

21A.212 Myth, Ritual, and Symbolism

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

How people make sense of their worlds sym-
bolically through myth, ritual, metaphor, and
cosmology. The structure of symbols, the
natural and social elements they draw on, their
social use, and the messages they convey.
Students learn to record and analyze myth and
ritual.

Consult J. Howe.

Descriptions of Subjects 487


--- 06.pdf Page 23 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

21A.214 Communities in Crisis

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

What happens when a community is severely

stressed? Investigates crises in several
western and nonwestern communities, and the
attempts made to resolve them by political,
religious, or other means.

M. Diskin

21A.215 Medical Anthropology
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Examination of how medicine is practiced

cross-culturally, with particular emphasis on
western biomedicine. Analysis of medical prac-
tice as a cultural system, focusing on the
human, as opposed to the biological, side of
things. Also examines how we and people in
other cultures think of disease, health, body,
and mind.

J. Jackson

21A.216 Monotheistic Religions in Cultural
Context

(New)

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

How and why did the major monotheistic

religions (Judaism, Christianity, Islam) arise
where and when they did? What were the his-
torical and cultural incentives for their develop-
ments; how did they become institutionalized
and spread? How did each one deal with the
establishment of its canonical texts and
doctrine, with heresies, and with reform move-
ments? Readings from the primary religious
texts, histories, theories of religion, and eth-
nographies.

A. Steinberg

21A.220 The Conquest of America

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5

The five-hundred-year encounter between na-

tive peoples of the Americas and European
power and culture. Exploration and conquest.
European ideology and fantasies about
“savages.” Colonialism, resistance, and adap-
tation. Missionizing and culture contact. Cases
include struggles of Maya, Iroquois, and native
New Englanders. Students learn to use
primary documents.

J. Howe

21A.223 Rural Communities: Dilemmas of
Development

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

Contemporary agrarian communities and the

problems they face, with emphasis on Mexico.
Peasants, plantation workers, and other rural
proletarians. Examines present-day and tradi-
tional farming technologies, gender and family
structures, politics, values, social movements,
rural-urban migration.

M. Diskin

21A.224J Introduction to Latin American
Studies

(Same subject as 21F.884J, 17.541J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

See description under subject 21F.884J.
M. Diskin, E. Garrels

21A.225 Rural Conflicts and Rebellion
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Examines rural conflicts or the rural com-
ponent of national conflicts in the modern and
pre-modern periods. Studies different
phenomena such as “primitive rebels,” cargo
cults and messianic movements, “everyday
forms of peasant resistance,” and agrarian
revolution. Examples from southeast Asia,
Mexico, and Europe.

M. Diskin

21A.230J The Contemporary Family

(Same subject as SP.456J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

The role of the family in human evolution, and

as a symbol in our own social and political
lives. Topics include: sex, marriage, and
parenting; the labor market; class, race, and
ethnicity; and the family’s probable future.

J. Jackson

21A.231J Gender, Sexuality, and Society

(Same subject as SP.455J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

An introduction to the anthropological study of

human sexuality, gender constructs, and the
sociocultural systems these are embedded in.
Examines current critiques of Western
philosophical and psychological traditions, and
cross-cultural variability and universals of
gender and sexuality.

J. Jackson

Technology and Cultural
Context

21A.334 Modern Times

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

Anthropologists, famous for excursions among
faraway peoples, increasingly study one of the
most bizarre societies of all — our own. A
cross-cultural perspective taking into account
both “primitive” societies and other industrial-
ized ones helps us to understand our own
body rituals, ethnic divisions, myths, living ar-
rangements, rites of education, sense of time,
and scientific cosmologies.

Consult J. Howe.

21A.340J Technology and Culture

(Same subject as STS.075J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Examines the relationship between technology
and the social life of humans from hunter-
gatherers to nuclear weapons scientists. Looks
at the effect of technological change on so-
called “primitive” societies, the relationship be-
tween colonialism, capitalism, and technology,
and the transformation of modern American
culture by television, computers, and
weapons. Readings include books and articles
by anthropologists, historians, and cultural
critics, as well as one science fiction novel.

H. Gusterson

21A.344 Drugs and Culture

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Examines relationship between drugs and
society in cross-cultural perspective. Examines
“traditional” societies’ use of mind-altering, ad-
dictive, and habit-forming substances, the
development of a global trade in sugar, opium,
and cocaine with the rise of capitalism, and the
use and abuse of alcohol, LSD, MDMA, and
Prozac in the US. Concludes by looking at ad-
diction as a cultural concept.

H. Gusterson

Culture History

21A.450 First Americans

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-6 HASS

Native cultures of North America from the first
ancient hunters to the present. Adaptation to
hunting and agriculture. Religion and
spirituality. Farmers of the Southwest; horse
peoples of the great plains; League of the Iro-
quois; peoples of New England. White con-
quest and native resistance. Native Americans
today.

Consult J. Howe.

488 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 24 ---
Anthropology Course 21F

21A.453 Culture History of the Middle East
(Revised Content and Units)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Focus on the Middle East as a culture area in

which there has been a very long and well-
known history and a great deal of change and
cross-cultural interaction. Examines the rise of
cities and empires and their collapse due to en-
vironmental and political causes; the rise of
major world religions; advances in military tech-
nology; religious wars; rise of nation states;
mercantile activity; the politics of oil; ethnic dif-
ferences and their solutions.

Consult J. Howe.

21A.454 Egypt’s Past
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

A culture-historical overview of the Nile Valley

from the earliest times to the present. The
management of the Nile Valley: agriculture, ir-
rigation, socio-political organizations, and the
role of religion. Relations with other parts of
Africa: trade, invasion, conquest. The Middle
Ages and the Mediterranean contacts. Dealing
with European imperialsim, the Suez Canal,
recent conflicts in historical perspective.
Consult J. Howe.

21A.457 Mexico and Central America from
Early Times to the Present

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

In this region, flourishing indigenous civiliza-

tions gave way to European colonialism, and
then to the independent countries of Mexico,
Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and
Nicaragua. Considers the cultures of this
region from a variety of anthropological, histori-
cal, and political perspectives over a long time
span, revealing both their differences and their
shared heritage.

M. Diskin

Topical

21A.560 The City in History

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

That unique human construct, the city, is the

focus. After discussing different approaches to
the study of the city, students look at examples
from the Near East, China, and the Greco-
Roman world to see how they evolved, dif-
fered, and decayed. Physical and social plans,
forces that shaped them, and the present and
future of cities are among the topics discussed.
A. Steinberg

21A.561 The Decline of Empires

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-6 HASS

After examination of basic institutions and

processes of empires from modern sociologi-
cal literature and recent examples, we derive
some generalities about how and why empires
disintegrate. Considers frontiers, military
power, bureaucracy, ruling elites, religions,
population growth, raw materials and markets,
and urbanization. Generalities tested against
examples chosen from ancient and medieval
times including Persia, Greece, Rome, Byzan-
tium, and China.

A. Steinberg

Graduate Subjects

For Program in History and Social Study
of Science and Technology

21A.670J Proseminar: Social Theory and
Analysis

(Same subject as STS.502J)
Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9

Major theorists and theoretical schools since

the late nineteenth century. Marx, Weber,
Durkheim, Bourdieu, Levi-Strauss, Geertz,
Foucault, Gramsci, others. Key terms, con-
cepts, debates.

J. Jackson

21A.671J Introduction to Cultural Criticism

(Subject meets with STS.507J, STS.059)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor

G (Spring)
2-0-7

See description under subject STS.507J.

H. Gusterson

Special Topics

21A.896, 21A.897 Special Topics in
Anthropology

Prereq.: Any two subjects in Anthropology

U (Fall, Spring)
Units arranged
Can be repeated for credit

Topics in anthropology not included in other

subjects. Students electing this subject must
secure the approval of the Head of the
Anthropology Program. HASS credit for Spe-
cial Topics subjects awarded only by individual
petitions to the Committee on Curricula. Nor-
mal maximum is 6 units; to count toward
HASS Requirement, 9 units are required. Ex-

ceptional 9-unit projects occasionally approved.

Consult J. Howe.

21A.998, 21A.999 Advanced Topics in
Anthropology

Prereq.: —

G (Fall, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Special studies or projects at an advanced
level with a member of the Anthropology
faculty.

Consult J. Howe.

For individual research in Anthropology,
register for 21A.UR or 21A.URG. For
Anthropology pre-thesis tutorial, register
for 21A.ThT. For undergraduate thesis,
register for 21A.ThU. Descriptions of these
subjects can be found in the beginning of
this section under 21.UR, 21.URG, 21.ThT,
and 21.ThU on page 487.

Descriptions of Subjects 489


--- 06.pdf Page 25 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

TLE Cer i a neit AON rr ee ee ee

Foreign Languages and
Literatures

Consult Foreign Languages and Literatures
Headquarters, 14N-305, for the most
up-to-date information about requirements and
subject offerings.

The subjects listed below include lan-
guage, literature, and cultural studies sub-
jects given in Chinese, French, German,
Japanese, Spanish, and Studies in Interna-
tional Literatures and Cultures. A variety of
literature subjects given in the original lan-
guage as well as some given in English
offer HASS Distribution credit.

HASS-D Language Option: Because the In-
stitute regards competence in foreign lan-
guage as a fundamental value, students
may substitute one language subject at
level Ill or IV (i.e., 21F.103, 21F.104,
21F.303, 21F.304, 21F.403, 21F.404,
21F.503, 21F.504, 21F.703, or 21F.704) for
one HASS-D subject. Of the two remaining
HASS-D subjects, one must be taken from
categories 4 or 5 and the other from one of
the remaining categories. Students select-
ing this language option may not choose a
second distribution subject taught in the
same foreign language or literature.

All foreign language subjects I-IV are open
to graduate students for credit.

For subjects in English as a Second Lan-
guage, see 21F.212—21F.240.

Chinese

The indication of prerequisites for specific
Chinese offerings does not apply to stu-

dents who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement ad-

vice, consult with a field advisor in Chinese.

21F.101 Chinese!
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS

Introduction to spoken and written modern

Chinese (Mandarin). Pronunciation, sentence
structure, grammar, conversation, reading and
writing. Lab work required. Enrollment limited
to 20 students.

Y. Tai

21F.102 Chinese Il

Prereq.: Chinese |
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Enhancement of four basic language skills. Ex-

tension of grammar and vocabulary. Lab work
required.
Y. Tai

21F.103 Chinese Ill

Prereq.: Chinese II
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Development of communication skills through
active use of the Chinese language. Emphasis
on expansion of vocabulary, reading and writ-
ing, conversation, and assigned oral presenta-
tion. Lab work required.

Y. Liu

21F.104 Chinese IV

Prereq.: Chinese III
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Emphasis on oral and written communication.

Attention paid to assigned simple writings,
more challenging oral presentations on topics
of everyday situations. Lab work required.

Y. Liu

21F.105 Advanced Chinese |
Prereq.: Chinese IV

Consolidation and expansion of skills in read-

ing and writing. Discussion in Mandarin of
literary and non-literary materials including
newspaper articles, short narratives, lyrical
and expository essays. Emphasis on cultural
and social issues. Compositions and lab work
required.

Y. Liu

21F.106 Advanced Chinese Il

Prereq.: Chinese V
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Continuation of 21F 105. Further development

of language skills in speaking and writing.
Materials are selected from public media in-
cluding reports in SCOLA, TV documentaries,
and articles in professional journals on social,
political, and economic changes in China. Both
oral and written reports are required.

Y. Liu

For Literature and Culture subjects on
China offered in English, see 21F.840,
21F.842.

English as a Second Language

21F.211 English Il: English as a Second
Language

(Subject meets with 21F.212)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall)

3-0-6

21F.212 English Il: English as a Second
Language

(Subject meets with 21F.211)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of
instructor

U (Fall)

3-0-6 HASS

Continued development of skills in oral com-
prehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Ac-
tivities, which include language laboratory
work, reinforce understanding and lead to an
increased ability to communicate.

M. Christie

21F.213 English Ill: English as a Second
Language

(Subject meets with 21F.214)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of
instructor

U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6 HASS

21F.214 English Ill: English as a Second
Language

(Subject meets with 21F.213)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-6

Improves and refines accuracy, fluency, and
style in both spoken and written English
through use of American newspapers, radio,
literary texts, videotapes, and movies. Also
leads to better understanding of American cul-
tures,

J. Dunphy

490 Chapter Vill


--- 06.pdf Page 26 ---
Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F

21F.215 Advanced Speaking and Critical
Listening Skills: English as a Second
Language

(Subject meets with 21F.216)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of in-
structor

G (Fall)

3-3-3

21F.216 Advanced Listening and Speaking
Skills: English as a Second Language

(Subject meets with 21F.215)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of
instructor

U (Fall)

3-3-3 HASS

For high intermediate/advanced students who

wish to build confidence and skills in spoken
English. Focuses on the appropriate oral
presentation of material in a variety of profes-
sional contexts: group discussions, classroom
explanations and interactions, as well as
thesis/research proposals. Valuable for those
who intend to teach or lecture in English. Lan-
guage laboratory assignments.

J. Dunphy

21F.217 Workshop in Strategies for
Effective Teaching: English as a Second
Language

(New)

(Subject meets with 21F.218)
Prereq.: —

G (IAP)

1-0-2

21F.218 Workshop in Strategies for
Effective Teaching: English as a Second
Language

(New)

(Subject meets with 21F.217)
Prereq.: —

U (IAP)

1-0-2

A mini-module for international teaching assis-

tants. Covers special problems in teaching
when English is a second language and the
US a second culture. Videotaping of practice
sessions for feedback. Individualized programs
to meet different needs. Graduate TAs have
priority.

J. Dunphy

21F.219 Workshop in Written Expression:
English as a Second Language

(New)

(Subject meets with 21F.220)

Prereq.: —

G (Fall)

3-0-3

21F.220 Workshop in Written Expression:

English as a Second Language
(New)

(Subject meets with 21F.219)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of in-
structor

U (Fall)

3-0-3

A seven-week writing module for ESL students

who wish to review and practice accurate
grammar, effective sentence and paragraph
structure, punctuation and word choice. Short
weekly writing assignments with extensive edit-
ing required. Class meets for 3 hours per week
during the first half of the term.

M. Christie

21F.222 Expository Writing Il for
Undergraduates: English as a Second
Language

(Revised Units)

Prereq.: Placement test or permission of
instructor

U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 HASS, Phase One WRIT

Formulating, organizing, and presenting ideas

clearly in writing. Reviews basic principles of
thetoric. Focuses on development of a topic,
thesis, choice of appropriate vocabulary, and
sentence structure to achieve purpose.
Develops idiomatic prose style. Gives attention
to grammar and vocabulary usage. Special
focus on strengthening skills of bilingual stu-
dents. Successful completion satisfies Phase |
of the Writing Requirement.

M. Christie

21F.225 Advanced Workshop in Writing for
Science and Engineering: English as a
Second Language

(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 21F.226)
Prereq.: Placement test

G (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9

21F.226 Advanced Workshop in Writing for

Science and Engineering: English as a
Second Language
(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 21F.225)
Prereq.: Placement test

U (Fall, Spring)

3-0-9 HASS, Phase Two WRIT

Analysis and practice of various forms of scien-

tific and technical writing, from memos to jour-
nal articles. Strategies for conveying technical
information to a specialist audience. Com-
parable to 21W.780 but methods designed to
deal with special problems of those whose first
language is not English. Successful comple-
tion satisfies Phase II of Writing Requirement
for students registered in 21F.226.

J. Dunphy

21F.227 Advanced Workshop in Writing for
Social Sciences and Architecture: English
as a Second Language

(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 21F.228)
Prereq.: Placement test

G (Spring)

3-0-9

21F.228 Advanced Workshop in Writing for
Social Sciences and Architecture: English
as a Second Language

(Revised Units)

(Subject meets with 21F.227)
Prereq.: Placement test

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS, Phase Two WRIT

Advanced subject focusing on techniques, for-
mat, and prose style used in academic and
professional life. Emphasis on writing as re-
quired in fields such as economics, political
science, and architecture. Short assignments
including business letters, memos, and
proposals build toward a written term project.
Methods are designed to deal with the special
problems of those whose first language is not
English. Successful completion satisfies
Phase II of the writing requirement for students
registered in 21F.228.

M. Christie

Studies in Language

21F.236J Linguistic Theory and Second
Language Acquisition

(Same subject as 24.948J)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: G (Spring)
3-0-6

See description under subject 24.948J.
W. O'Neil, S. Flynn

21F.237J The Study of Language

(Same subject as 24.900J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 24.900J.
S. Flynn, Staff

21F.240J Language and its Structure I:
Phonology

(Same subject as 24.901J)
Prereq.: 24.900J/21F 237J
U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

See description under subject 24.901J.
W. O'Neil

Descriptions of Subjects 491


--- 06.pdf Page 27 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

French

The indication of prerequisites for specific
French offerings does not apply to stu-
dents who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement ad-
vice, consult with one of the field advisors
in French.

Fundamental Language Subjects

21F.301 French!
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Introduction to French language and culture.

Emphasis on the acquisition of vocabulary and
grammatical concepts through active com-
munication. Immediate exposure to authentic
French via video sources and printed
materials; for developing cultural awareness
as well as linguistic proficiency. Coordinated
language lab program.

S. Levet

21F.302 French Il

Prereq.: French |
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Further development of linguistic proficiency

through active communication. Expansion of
vocabulary and completion of the basics of
French grammar. Continued exposure to cul-
turally authentic audio and video materials in
the classroom and the language lab. Study of
short texts. Increased practice in writing.

S. Levet

21F.303 French lil

Prereq.: French Il
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Review and expanded study of selected
aspects of French grammar. Analysis of films
and/or texts from a cross-cultural perspective.
Use of interactive multimedia materials for
developing comprehension of authentic
spoken French and for the exploration of
French cultural attitudes and behaviors. Week-
ly practice in composition. Daily exercises in
oral communication and vocabulary enrich-
ment.

G. Furstenberg

21F.304 French IV

Prereq.: French lil
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Final subject in the French language sequence

before taking intermediate subjects in French
literature and culture. Further development of
linguistic skills, for improving the overall quality
of writing and oral fluency. The cultural content
of the course is provided by a variety of con-
temporary materials, ranging from comic
books, to short stories to films to interactive
CD-ROMs.

S. Waryn

492 Chapter VIII

Subjects in Language, Literature, and
Culture

These subjects (21F.308, 310, 311, 320) are
designed for students who have completed
French IV or its equivalent. They serve as a
transition between language study and
more advanced subjects in literature and
cultures. Although each subject has a dif-
ferent emphasis, all provide students with
additional practice in reading, speaking,
and writing.

Students may take several subjects from
these offerings. Native speakers of French
who have studied French literature at a
high school level must seek the
instructor’s approval for admission to any
of these subjects.

21F.308 Advanced French Language Study

Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

For those who have completed French IV or

the equivalent, but who wish to continue with
language study before taking upper-level sub-
jects in literature or culture. Development of
reading, writing, and phonetics through the
use of a variety of documents, stories, and
poems.

S. Levet

21F.310 French Conversation: Intensive
Practice

Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Systematic training in oral expression: com-

munication skills, fluency, and idiomatic
French. Audio and video tapes to improve con-
versational techniques and other forms of oral
expression (debates, speeches, reports, inter-
views). Discussion materials: newspapers,
magazines, recent films, and varied audio and
interactive video programs dealing with issues
in contemporary France. Focus on cultural
phenomena specific to French society. Special
projects (video and other) by students. Limited
to 16.

S. Waryn

21F.311 Introduction to French Culture

Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1

Studies major social, political, and aesthetic

modes which have shaped French civilization.
Coordinates the study of literature, film, and
art with the historical evolution of France.

M. Roberts

21F.320 Introduction to French Literature

Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

A basic study of major French literary genres
— poetry, drama, and fiction — and an intro-
duction to methods of literary analysis. Authors
include Voltaire, Balzac, Baudelaire, Apol-
linaire, lonesco, Duras. Special attention
devoted to the improvement of French lan-
guage skills.

M. Roberts



--- 06.pdf Page 28 ---
Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F

Advanced Subjects in Literature and
Culture

Students are required to take at least one
intermediate subject before enrolling in ad-
vanced subjects. Otherwise they must ob-
tain permission of the instructor.

21F.336 Introduction to the French
Short Story

Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or

equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Short stories by major French authors. Special

attention paid to the theme of the fantastic and
the supernatural. Works by Perrault, Barbey
d'Aurevilly, Villers de I'lsle-Adam, Maupassant,
Nelly Kaplan, and Michel Tournier.

M. Roberts

21F.338 The French Novel in the Nineteenth
Century

Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or

equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

The golden age of the French novel. Em-

phasizes Romanticism, Realism, and
Naturalism in Balzac, Stendhal, Sand,

Flaubert, and Zola. Themes include the interac-
tion of love, money, and politics in the newly
developed bourgeois society of nineteenth-cen-
tury France. Devotes attention to narrative
techniques, representations of reality, and the
influence of history and science.

Consult |. de Courtivron.

21F.340 The French Novel in the Twentieth
Century

Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or

equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Reading and discussion of major twentieth-

century French novels. Emphasis on literary
techniques as well as historical and cultural
contexts. Works by writers such as Genet,
Gide, Yourcenar, Proust, Colette, and Camus.
|. de Courtivron

21F.342 Topics in French Film

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Can be repeated for credit

Close study of a topic that relates to the art

and history of the French cinema and that
focuses on a specific director, movement,
theme, critical or theoretical issue, analytic ap-
proach, etc. Films shown with English subtit-
les. For 1995-96 the topic is Marcel Carné
and Jean Renoir: two major directors, two
cinematic visions. Conducted in English.

E. B. Turk

21F.344 From Renaissance to Revolution:

The French Humanist Tradition in Literature

Prereq.: One intermediate French subject or
equivaient

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 HASS

Readings in major writers of the Renaissance

(Rabelais, Montaigne, Ronsard), the Neo-Clas-
sic Period (Corneille, Racine, Moliere, La Fon-
taine), and the Enlightenment (Rousseau,
Prévost, Voltaire, Beaumarchais). Places texts
in cultural and intellectural contexts, with em-
phasis on how the Renaissance concept of be-
stowing special value on human individuality
evolved over a period of three centuries.

E. B. Turk

21F.399 Intensive French Language and

Culture: Preparing to Work in France

Prereq.: French IV or equivalent
U (IAP)
4-0-8 HASS

Prepares students to express themselves
fluently and to function in a French work en-
vironment in the field of their choice. Main com-
ponents are: a general review of grammar and
communication skills; a series of lectures and
presentations on French science and technol-
ogy; advanced independent study of French
language using the latest interactive resour-
ces, with an emphasis on science and technol-
ogy; and an introduction to historical and
contemporary aspects of French cultural life.
Priority given to seniors and graduates.

S. Waryn

For literature subjects on France offered in
English, see 21F.850 through 21F.852.

German

The indication of prerequisites for specific
German offerings does not apply to stu-
dents who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement ad-
vice, consult one of the field advisors in
German.

Fundamental Language Subjects

21F.401 German!

Prereq.: —
U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Basic principles of the German language. Fun-

damentals of pronunciation, intonation, and
grammar. Acquisition of basic vocabulary.
Laboratory exercises to further communicative
competence.

M. Totten, E. Crocker

21F.402 German Il

Prereq.: German |
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Continued practice in pronunciation and intona-
tion. Vocabulary building, review and exten-
sion of basic grammar. Practice in writing short
essays. Reading of short literary texts. Intro-
duces the history and culture of German-
speaking countries.

E. Crocker, M. Totten

21F.403 German Ill

Prereq.: German II
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Reading of drama, prose, and poetry by such
major twentieth-century authors as
Dirrenmatt, Boll, Borchert, and others. Discus-
sions and compositions based on these works,
media selections, and audio/videotapes on
contemporary issues in the German-speaking
world link the learning of language and that of
culture. Review of German grammar and
development of vocabulary-building strategies
to improve self-expression. Recommended for
students with two years of high school German.
K. Fendt

21F.404 German IV

Prereq.: German III
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Further deepening of an understanding of Ger-
man language and culture. Interpretation of
literary texts (Brothers Grimm, Frisch, Brecht),
discussion of cultural topics, development of
oral communicative competence in practical
everyday situations.

E. Crocker, M. Totten

Intermediate and Advanced Subjects
in Language, Literature, and Culture

21F.410 Speaking and Writing: German in
Technology and Business
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: German IV or equivalent
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Systematic training in speaking and writing
skills to improve fluency and style with em-
phasis on communicative strategies. Discus-
sion and analysis of newspaper and magazine
articles, audio and visual materials, and
modern expository prose. Students select a
topic of their choice and present the final
projects to the class.

B. Widdig

Descriptions of Subjects 493


--- 06.pdf Page 29 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

21F.412 Introduction to German Literature

Prereq.: German IV or equivalent
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1

Readings from German prose fiction, poetry,
and drama. Authors include Goethe, Brecht, T.

Mann, Keller, Kafka, Rilke, Christa Wolf.
Literary language as specialized communica-
tion; its conventions and presuppositions; rela-
tion of author to audience; imitation of reality
vs experimentation with reality; purpose in
literature: aesthetic, analytic, parodistic, and
political goals. Conducted entirely in German,
emphasizing reading, speaking, and writing

21F.414 German Culture and Society:
1750-1945

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

German Enlightenment, impact of the French

Revolution on Germany, the failure of
liberalism, the discrepancy between economic
and political development, and the increasing
polarization of society as manifested in the
various forms of cultural expression, impact of
World War |, rise of National Socialism. Read-
ings include Lessing, Kant, Schiller, Marx,
Nietzsche, and Freud. Music by Mozart,
Schumann, Wagner, Schénberg. Paintings by
Friedrich, Kirchner, Kokoschka. Lecture in
English, separate discussion sections in Ger-
man and English, readings in German or
English.

B. Widdig

21F.416 Twentieth-Century German
Literature

Prereq.: German IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Literature of the German-speaking countries

viewed against the backdrop of history (World
War I, inflation and depression, National
Socialism, the anti-Nazi resistance and exile,
World War II, the division and unification of
Germany) and cultural trends (Expressionism,
Dadaism, Nazi-culture, post-war literature, stu-
dent-movement of the 1960s, new subjec-
tivity). Authors include Th. and H. Mann,
Brecht, Frisch, Boll, and C. Wolf.

B. Widdig

21F.418 German Poetry and Short Fiction

Prereq.: German IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Poetry and short fiction from the nineteenth

and twentieth centuries. Representative works
read and discussed, emphasizing metaphoric
and rhythmic use of language, narrative
strategy, aesthetic structure, social concern,
and historical context. Authors ificlude: Kleist,
E. T. A. Hoffmann, Buchner, Rilke, Goethe,
von Giinderrode, Eichendorff, Bachmann, and
Grass.

B. Widdig

494 Chapter VIII

21F.499 Germany Today: Intensive German
Language and Culture

Prereq.: German IV or equivalent
U (IAP)
4-0-8 HASS

Helps students perfect their communication

skills and prepares them for working and living
in German-speaking countries. Topics studied
include: current political debates; Germany in
its European context; the scientific and busi-
ness communities; the influence of the media;
business German; the contemporary artistic
and cultural scene.

Consult M. Totten.

For Literature and Culture subjects on Ger-
many offered in English, see 21F.814,
21F.856, 21F.858, and 21F.860.

Japanese

The indication of prerequisites for specific
Japanese offerings does not apply to stu-
dents who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement ad-
vice, consult with one of the field advisors
in Japanese.

Fundamental Language Subjects

21F.501 Beginning Japanese |
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS

Introduction to modern standard Japanese.

Emphasis on developing proficiency in speak-
ing and listening, using basic grammar and
vocabulary. Basic skills in reading and writing
are also taught. Lab work required.

M. Ikeda

21F.502 Beginning Japanese II
Prereq.: 21F.501

U (Spring)

4-0-8 HASS

Enhancement of the four basic skills. Exten-

sion of basic grammar. Vocabulary and kanji
(Chinese characters) building. Lab work re-
quired.

M. Ikeda

21F.503 Intermediate Japanese |

Prereq.: 21F.502

U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option
Development of the four basic skills. Con-
tinued vocabulary and kanji building. Lab work
required.

Y. Nagaya

21F.504 Intermediate Japanese Il

Prereq.: 21F.503

U (Spring)

4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Review and expansion of basic grammar. Em-
phasis on application of basic grammar and
vocabulary in various situations. Lab work re-
quired.

Y. Nagaya

21F.505 Advanced Japanese |

(21F.510)
Prereq.: 21F.504
U (Fall)

4-0-8 HASS

Systematic development of reading, writing,
and oral communication skills. Introduction to
advanced grammar. Deepening of the under-
standing of Japanese culture and society
through reading and discussion. Lab work re-
quired.

T. Aikawa

21F.506 Advanced Japanese Il

(21F.512)
Prereq.: 21F.510
U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Continuation of 21F.510. Further development
of reading, writing, and oral communication
skills through reading and video. Extension of
advanced grammar and further build-up of ad-
vanced vocabulary. Variety of cultural ele-
ments studied through readings, video, and
discussion. Lab work required.

T. Aikawa

21F.507 Advanced Readings and
Communication in Japanese |
(New)

Prereq.: 21F.506 or permission of instructor
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS

Students develop Japanese language skills
necessary for professional as well as social
settings. Uses selected materials from
newspapers, videos, Internet, and other sour-
ces. A common core of course materials focus-
ing on major topics in contemporary Japan is
provided and discussed. In addition, each stu-
dent selects and studies material in his/her
own field using the electronic instruction en-
vironment of MIT's JP NET with the instructor's
guidance. All reading and discussions are in
Japanese.

T. Graham

21F.508 Advanced Readings and
Communication in Japanese li
(New)

Prereq.: 21F.507 or permission of instructor
U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

A continuation of 21F.507. Coursework similar
in structure to 21F.507, but with increased em-
phasis on independent projects.

T. Graham


--- 06.pdf Page 30 ---
Advanced Subjects

21F.514 Linguistic Theory and Japanese
Language

(Subject meets with 24.946)
Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

Detailed examination of the grammar of
Japanese, whose structure is significantly dif-
ferent from English, with special emphasis on
problems of interest in the study of linguistic
universals. Data from a broad group of lan-
guages will also be studied for comparison
with Japanese. Meets with graduate subject
24.946, but assignments differ. Assumes
familiarity with linguistic theory.

S. Miyagawa

For culture subjects on Japan offered in
English, see 21F.864 and 21F.866.

Russian

For Literature and Culture subjects on Rus-
sia offered in English, see 21F.872J and
21F.873J.

Spanish

The indication of prerequisites for specific
Spanish offerings does not apply to stu-

dents who have already accomplished the
equivalent work. For further placement ad-

vice, consult with a field advisor in Spanish.

Fundamental Language Subjects

21F.701 Spanish |
Prereq.: —

U (Fall, IAP, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Introduction to understanding, speaking, read-

ing, and writing Spanish. Maximal use of fun-
damentals of grammar in active
communication. Audio- and video-based lan-
guage laboratory program coordinated with
and supplementary to class work.

M. Ribas Groeger

21F.702 Spanish Il

Prereq.: Spanish |
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Increased practice in listening comprehension,

reading, and group interaction.
M. Ribas Groeger

Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F

21F.703 Spanish Ill

Prereq.: Spanish II

U (Fall, Spring)

4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Aims at consolidation and expansion of skills

in aural comprehension, speaking, reading,
and writing. Uses short stories and other read-
ings, Hispanic television programs, and interac-
tive video to study issues of current interest in
Hispanic culture.

D. Morgenstem

21F.704 Spanish IV

Prereq.: Spanish III
U (Fall, Spring)
4-0-8 HASS-D Language Option

Continued study of the language, literature,

and culture of Spanish-speaking countries.
Materials are from both Spain and Latin
America and include films, short stories,
novels, plays, poetry, and journalistic reports in
various media.

M. Gonzdélez-Aguilar

21F.705 Oral Communication in Spanish

Prereq.: Spanish I!

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-6 HASS

Gives students the necessary language skills

to perform successfully in Spanish in a variety
of social situations. Focus on oral communica-
tion. Uses popular media for listening practice.
Student projects involve reading, oral presenta-
tions, and classroom interaction. Emphasizes
communication skills needed by students in en-
gineering and management for work in Latin
America or Spain.

D. Morgenstern

Intermediate Subjects in Language,
Literature, and Culture

These subjects (21F.710-21F.715) are
designed for students who have completed
Spanish IV or its equivalent. They serve as
a transition between language study and
more advanced subjects in literature and
culture. Although each subject has a dif-
ferent emphasis, all provide students with
additional practice in reading, speaking,
and writing.

It is required that all students take one of
the intermediate-level subjects before en-
rolling in 21F.716 and above. Students may
take several subjects from these offerings.
Native speakers of Spanish who have
studied Hispanic literature at a high school
level must seek the instructor’s approval
for admission to any of these subjects.

21F.712 Spanish Conversation and
Composition

Prereq.: Spanish IV or equivalent
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Systematic training in spoken and written skills
to improve fluency and style. Oral reports by
participants on individual topics. Discussions
with native speakers, analyses of selected
literary texts, periodicals, and Spanish-lan-
guage media.

D. Morgenstem

21F.713 Advanced Reading and Writing in
Spanish
(Revised Content)

(21F.710)

Prereq.: Spanish IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Students read and discuss works by authors
from diverse quarters of Hispanic culture, con-
sider basic problems of interpretation, improve
their ability to read, discuss, and write about
literary texts, and review advanced Spanish
grammar. Materials for class discussion and
composition include Hispanic novels, novellas,
short stories, plays, and poems.

N. Wey-Gémez

21F.714 Spanish for Bilingual Students

Prereq.: Fluency in a Spanish dialect
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Designed for students of Hispanic background
brought up in the US. Expands oral and written
grammar study and increases contact with
standard Spanish; studies recent fiction and
poetry as well as specific historical, social,
economic, and political aspects of Mexican-
American, Puerto Rican, and Cuban cultures.
Many of the nonliterary readings are in
English; class discussions in Spanish.

D. Morgenstern

Descriptions of Subjects 495


--- 06.pdf Page 31 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

21F.715 Introduction to Spanish Culture

Prereq.: Spanish IV or equivalent
Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Studies the major social, political, and aes-

thetic modes which have shaped Spanish
civilization. Coordinates the study of literature,
film, art, and architecture with the historical
evolution of Spain. Readings and discussion
focus on such topics as: the coexistence of
Christians, Moors, and Jews, Imperial Spain,
The First and Second Republics, and the con-
temporary period as background for the emer-
gence of distinctively Spanish literary and
artistic movements.

M. Resnick

Advanced Subjects in Literature and
Culture

Students are required to have taken at least
one intermediate subject before enrolling in
advanced subjects, or obtain permission of
the instructor.

21F.716 Introduction to Contemporary
Hispanic Literature

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish

or equivalent
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1

Studies important twentieth-century texts from

both Spain and Latin America that represent
the principal fictional genres — poetry, theatre,
short story, and the novel. Includes works by
Hernandez, Bombal, Lorca, Neruda, Vallejo,
Machado, Unamuno, Garcia Marquez, Ferré,
Riera, and Aub.

M. Resnick

21F.718 Art and the Intelligentsia in
Post-Colonial Hispanic America
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish

or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Looks at the evolving polemic, from Simon

Bolivar and the early nineteenth-century Wars
of Independence to the intelligentsia in
Hispanic America and what is its social func-
tion. When have the roles of artist, intellectual,
and political activist coincided? When have
they diverged? How have these roles been
defined or complicated by social class, race,
ethnicity, and gender? Spanish-language
novels, poetry, short stories, essays, tes-
timonials, and films, including works by
Bolivar, Marti, Dario, Azuela, Guillén, Ar-
guedas, Menchi, Garro, Cortazar, Paz, Gam-
baro, Cuban filmmakers, Chicana poets, and
contemporary performance artists.

E. Garrels

21F.729 Making the Other Speak:
Narratives From the Spanish Conquest of
the New World

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish,

or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

How might New World peoples be thought to

“speak” in key stories of Spain’s colonization of
America? How do individual and collective,
Old and New World views shape these
stories? Selections include: Columbus on the
Discovery; Cortes on his conquest of Mexico;
Sahagun’s Indian informants on Mexico's fall;
Las Casas on the unlawfulness of Spain’s ex-
pansionism; Cabeza de Vaca on shipwreck
and survival; Cieza, Garcilaso, and various An-
dean chroniclers on the conquest of Peru;
Ursua on Aguirre’s search for El Dorado. In-
cludes some cinematic versions. Students are
asked to reflect on the relationship among
storytelling, ideology, and historical truth.

N. Wey-Gémez

21F.730 Twentieth-Century Hispanic
American Literature

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 HASS

Concentrates on the classics of this century,
with a few surprises: Quiroga’s and Borges’
short stories, poetry by Vallejo and Neruda,
Teresa de la Parra’s Las memorias de Mama
Blanca, Rulfo’s Pedro Paramo, Garcia
Marquez’s Cien afios de soledad, and more.
E. Garrels

21F.736 The Short Story in Spain and
Hispanic America

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)

Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered

3-0-9 HASS

Studies the evolution of the short story in
Spain and Hispanic America from the sixteenth
century to the present. Considers the short
story as a genre with unique possibilities for ex-
pression. Some semesters students write their
own short stories in Spanish. Authors include
Borges, Cortazar, Quiroga, Cervantes, Maria
de Zayas, Pardo Bazan, and numerous con-
temporary women writers.

E. Garrels

21F.738 Literature and Social Conflict:
Perspectives on Modern Spain

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish
or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered

Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

Considers how major literary texts illuminate
principal issues in the evolution of modem
Spanish society. Emphasizes the treatment of
such major questions as the exile of liberals in
1820, the concept of progress, the place of
religion, urbanization, rural conservatism and
changing sex roles, and the Spanish Civil War.
Authors studied include Pérez Galdés, Pardo
Bazan, Unamuno, Ortega y Gasset, Salinas,
Lorca, La Pasionaria, and Falcon.

M. Resnick

496 Chapter VIII


--- 06.pdf Page 32 ---
Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F

21F.740 The New Spain: 1977—Present

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish

or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Deals with the vast changes in Spanish social,

political, and cultural life that have taken place
since the death of Franco. New freedom from
censorship; the re-emergence of strong move-
ments for regional autonomy: the Basque
region and Catalonia; the new cinema includ-
ing Almodévar and Saura; educational reforms
instituted by the socialist government, as well
as the fiction of Carmé Riera and Terenci
Moix, are examined. Special emphasis placed
on the emergence of mass media as a vehicle
for expression in Spain. Consideration given to
the changes wrought by Spain’s acceptance
into the European Community. Material in-
cludes magazines, newspapers, films, fiction
and Amando de Miguel’s Los Espajfioles.

M. Resnick

21F.741 Theater and Society in the
Spanish-Speaking World
(Revised Content)

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish,

or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Hispanic theater and its performance from

Golden Age masterworks to twentieth-century
experimental and political drama in Spain,
Latin America, and the US. What has been the
place of drama in various Hispanic societies?
Includes major works such as Lope de Vega’s
Fuenteovejuna, Calderén de la Barca’s La
vida es suefio, Valle-inclan’s Luces de
bohemia, Buero Vallejo’s El tragaluz, Triana’s
La noche de los asesinos, Benedetti’s Pedro y
el capitan, Gambaro’s Los siameses, and
Garcia Marquez’s Diatriba de amor contra un
hombre sentado, Also includes film produc-
tions. Conducted in Spanish.

N. Wey-Gomez

21F.742 Cervantes and His Age

Prereq.: One intermediate subject in Spanish

or equivalent

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Critics have long recognized Spain as the

birthplace of the novel and have seen in Don
Quijote de la Mancha the prototype for this
genre. Concentrates on Don Quijote but also
considers the author Cervantes as an out-
standing example of the humanist in sixteenth-
century Spain and Europe. Attention to
Cervantes’ humor and irony as well as his
ideas on religion, justice, love, language, and
artistic creation.

N. Wey-Gomez

21F.748 History of the Spanish Language

Prereq.: Permission of instructor
Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Starts with the modern language and proceeds

to successively earlier stages. Includes
general concepts of language change; specific
phonological, morphological, and syntactic
changes in the history of Spanish; the place of
Spanish among Romance tongues; modern
dialects; reading of representative texts of ear-
lier periods. Discussion and readings in
English and Spanish. Spanish III or equivalent
normally provides sufficient preparation.

J. W. Harris

For Literature and Culture subjects taught
in English on Spain and Latin America, see
21F.810, 21F.812, 21F.820J, 21F.880,
21F.884J.

Studies in International
Literatures and Cultures

Studies in International Literatures and Cul-
tures make various modes of intercultural
discourse available in English. Those sub-
jects that deal with works from more than
one nation give students the opportunity to
do work in comparative studies. A sig-
nificant number of subjects also allow stu-
dents to study works from a single foreign
country.

Cross-Cultural Subjects in Translation

21F.810 Introduction to European and Latin
American Fiction

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Studies great works of European and Latin

American fiction. Attention to a variety of forms
including the picaresque, epistolary, realist,
naturalist, and magical realist fiction. Em-
phasizes ways in which the unique history of
each country shaped the imaginative respon-
ses of its writers. Authors read include Cervan-
tes, Laclos, Goethe, Mann, Dostoevsky,
Flaubert, Zola, Unamuno, Wolf, Garcia
Marquez, and Allende.

M. Resnick

21F.812 Christopher Columbus: Science
and Politics in the Age of Discovery

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Studies the philosophical foundations of racial
prejudice, colonialism, and slavery in the Age
of Discovery. Focuses on the relationship be-
tween scientific systems of description and
classification and political theory in Early
Modern Europe. Topics include: the concep-
tion of the cosmos prior to Newton’s mathe-
matical refutation of Aristotle’s geocentric
universe; the impact of these ideas in early
portrayals of Indians and their “place” in a new
imperial order; the idealized and demonic
stereotypes of Indians resulting from early
colonial contact in More’s Utopia,
Shakespeare’s The Tempest, etc. Class con-
ducted in English.

N. Wey-Gomez

21F.814 Modernism and Its Discontents

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Investigates the various reactions of writers, ar-
tists, philosophers, and filmmakers to the
process of social and cultural modernization
during the early twentieth century. Topics: the
city as text, the fascination with technology
and the machine, myth and modernity, avant-
garde art movements, reactionary modernism,
redefinitions of sexuality. In 1997-98, subject
emphasizes German modernism. Readings by
Marx, Freud, Benjamin, Déblin, Hesse, Brecht,
Junger; films by Lang, Murnau, Pabst; artistic
production of German expressionism, Neue
Sachlichkeit, Bauhaus. Taught in English.

B. Widdig

21F.816 Alternative Cinema: Male
Same-Sex Desire in International Film
(New)

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
2-2-8 HASS

Interpretation and analysis of works by interna-
tional filmmakers who focus on male
homosexual desire. Primary attention given to
ways in which screen representations of same-
sex desire affect narrative form, cinematic
style, and human vision. Films studied in cul-
tural and political contexts. Filmmakers in-
clude: Almodovar, Kenneth Anger, Gregg
Araki, Denys Arcand, Bertolucci, Antonia Byrd,
Fassbinder, Jean Genet, Todd Haynes, Derek
Jarman, Isaac Julien, Bruce La Bruce,
Takehiro Murata, Pasolini, Marlon Riggs,
Frank Ripploh, Gus Van Sant, André Téchiné,
Andy Warhol. Non-English-language films in
subtitled versions.

E. B. Turk

Descriptions of Subjects 497


--- 06.pdf Page 33 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

21F.820J New World Literature

(Same subject as 21L.444J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1

Studies in comparative patterns of develop-

ment in the diverse American traditions of
literature, race, gender, and cultural identity.
Works from the Americas, as well as by
European writers responding to America.

N. Wey-Gomez, M. Fuller

21F.822J International Women’s Voices

(Same subject as SP.431J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 1

Introduces students to a variety of fictional
works by contemporary women writers. The
subject's international perspective emphasizes
the extent to which each author's work reflects
her distinct cultural heritage and to what ex-
tent, if any, we can identify a female voice that
transcends national boundaries. A variety of in-
terpretive perspectives, including sociohistori-
cal, psychoanalytic, and feminist criticism will
be used to examine the texts. Authors read in-
clude: Mariama Ba, Isabel Allende, Anita
Desai, Maxine Hong Kingston, Toni Morrison,
Doris Lessing, Alifa Riyaat, Yang Jiang, Nawal
Al-Saadawi, and Sawako Ariyoshi.

M. Resnick

21F.823 Women’s Voices: An International
Perspective

(New)

Prereq.: —

G (Spring)

3-0-9

Introduces students to fictional works by con-

temporary women writers. The subject's inter-
national perspective emphasizes the extent to
which each author's work reflects her distinct
cultural heritage and to what extent, if any, we
can identify a female voice that transcends na-
tional boundaries. Interpretive perspectives, in-
cluding sociohistorical, psychoanalytic, and
feminist criticism. Authors include Mariama Ba,
Isabel Allende, Hong Kingston, Toni Morrison,
Alifa Riyaat, Nawal Al-Saadawi, Yang Jiang,
Anita Desai and Sawako Ariyoshi. Graduate
students are expected to pursue the subject in
greater depth through reading and individual
projects.

M. Resnick

21F.828J Sex Roles in Fiction: Europe and
Latin America

(Same subject as SP.432J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Examines the representation of sexual roles in

fiction. Studies works by European and Latin
American authors in their cultural and historical
contexts. Themes emphasized include bour-
geois women, women rebels, and redefinition
of sex roles. Comparative analysis of works by
Laclos, Fontane, Moliére, Sor Juana Inés de la
Cruz, Zola, Lorca, Wolf, Wittig, Machado de
Assis, Colette, and Puig. Materials used in-
clude films by: Godard, Bufuel, Saura, M. v.
Trotta.

M. Resnick

Culture-Specific Subjects in Translation

21F.840 Introduction to Chinese Classic
Fiction

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Traces the evolution of Chinese fiction from its

roots in the oral tradition through major novels
of the eighteenth century. This genre includes
historical, supernatural, detective, and love
stories. Attention paid to the art of the early
storytellers; Confucian, Taoist, and Buddhist
themes; the interpolation of poetry in narra-
tives; the Literati writers; and other aspects of
culture reflected in the readings. Works read in-
clude Three Kingdoms, Monkey King, The
Dream of the Red Chamber, and others.

Y. Tai

21F.842 Chinese Drama Through the Ages

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

An introduction to Chinese drama through

readings and videos. Students examine the
cultural heritage of the Chinese theatre from
the stylized traditional mode of the Yuan
Dynasty through the realistic plays of the twen-
tieth century. The social and historical role of
the theatre in shaping Chinese ethical con-
cerns is studied. Discussions focus on
dramaturgy, production techniques, and styles.
Attention paid to the similarities and differen-
ces between the Chinese and Western
theatres, and the interchange between the two.
Y. Tai

21F.850J French Literature in Translation

(Same subject as 21L.490J)

Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS

Reading and analysis of landmark works of
French literature, from the neo-classical period
through the twentieth century, in English trans-
lation. Attention to intellectual and cultural con-
texts. Typically, writers include Racine,
Moliére, Voltaire, Beaumarchais, Balzac,
Flaubert, Baudelaire, Proust, Genet, lonesco,
Beckett, Duras, and Yourcenar.

E. B. Turk

21F 851 The Avant-Garde in France

Prereq.: French IV

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Focuses on avant-garde movements and their
relationship to dominant institutions and values
in twentieth-century France, including Sur-
realism, Situationalism, and other counter-cul-
tures (the nouvelle vague, the nouveau roman,
post-structuralism). Topics include: sexual
politics of the avant-garde aesthetics; dissident
voices within avant-garde groups; avant-garde
aesthetics and mythologies in contemporary
mass culture; theories of the avant-garde and
debates about its alleged obsolescence. Con-
ducted in English.

M. Roberts

21F.852 French Film Classics

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
4-0-8 HASS

History and aesthetics of French cinema from
the advent of sound to the present day. Treats
films in the context of technical processes, the
art of narration, directorial style, role of the
scriptwriter, the development of schools and
movements, the impact of political events and
ideologies, and the relation between French
and other national cinemas. Directors studied
include Clair, Vigo, Carné, Renoir, Clouzot,
Ophuls, Godard, Truffaut, Malle, and Aker-
man. The unifying theme in selection and
analysis of films is sex and society. Films
shown with English subtitles.

E. B. Turk

21F.856 The German Cinema

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
4-0-8 HASS

Overview of German film since its beginnings.
Weekly screenings. Lectures and discussions
deal with technical and aesthetic as well as
socio-historical aspects. Students keep weekly
journals based on thorough analysis of films as
well as readings on social and historical back-
ground. Directors include Lang, Murnau,
Pabst, Schléndorff, Wenders, Herzog,
Fassbinder, Staudte, M. v. Trotta. Conducted
in English. Films shown with English subtitles.
B. Widdig

498 Chapter VIII


--- 06.pdf Page 34 ---
Foreign Languages and Literatures Course 21F

21F.858 Modern German Novels in
Translation

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Twentieth-century fiction from Germany,

Austria, and Switzerland. Emphasizes major
themes (bourgeois conventions and rebellion
against them, role of the artist, individual and
collective guilt, the metropolis, World War II
and its aftermath), development of novel form,
narrative structure, social and historical con-
text. Authors include Thomas Mann, Kafka,
Hesse, Grass, Christa Wolf. Showing of a film
version of at least one novel.

B. Widdig

21F.860 Postwar Germany and Its Historical
Burden

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Examines through literary and sociological

texts the historical, political, and cultural forces
that define German culture and society today.
Topics: value changes in postwar society,
coping with the legacy of the past, the role of
writers and intellectuals, foreign cultures in
Germany, political participation and protest, dif-
ferences between East and West after unifica-
tion. Texts by Dahrendorf, Enzensberger,
Grass, Koeppen, Mitscherlich, Oren, Wolf,
among others, in addition to films by
Fassbinder, Sanders-Brahms, von Trotta. Lec-
ture in English, discussion section in German
or in English, readings in German or English.
B. Widdig

21F.864 Introduction to Japanese Culture

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Study of the major aesthetic, social, and politi-

cal elements which have shaped modern
Japanese culture and society. Readings on
contemporary Japan and historical evolution of
the culture coordinated with study of literary
texts, film, and art.

S. Miyagawa

21F.866 Japan in Real Time
(New)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Looks extensively at topics on modern Japan,

including issues in modern Japanese life,
popular culture, fine arts, and film. Material
drawn from the Internet as well as books and
articles. Material on the Internet is updated fre-
quently, bringing immediacy to the study of
modern Japan. Students engage in a project
using some form of electronic media. Techni-
cal support provided if necessary. Lectures
and reading in English. Students with
knowledge of the Japanese language have the
option of doing their project in Japanese.

S. Miyagawa

21F.872J Russian Novel of the Nineteenth
Century

(Same subject as 21L.480J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Spring)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-0-9 HASS

Studies the greatest Russian prose writers of

the nineteenth century: Pushkin, Lermontov,
Gogol, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky. Attention given to
the rise of the Russian novel within the
European context. Students with a knowledge
of Russian encouraged to read portions of
texts in the original.

Staff

21F.873J Twentieth-Century Russian
Literature

(Same subject as 21L.484J)
Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS

Considers great Russian poetry, novels, short

stories of the twentieth century. A variety of fic-
tional responses to the complex political
landscape including the avant-garde, socialist
realism, literature of dissent and glasnost. At-
tention given to the consequences of censor-
ship and the limitations on all aspects of
individual freedom — religious persecution,
gender discrimination, and state terror.
Authors include: Blok, Akhmatova, Bely,
Zamiatin, Gladkov, Pasternak, Bulgakov,
Brodsky, Tolstaya. Students with a knowledge
of Russian are encouraged to read portions of
these texts in the original.

S. Ketchian

21F.880 Masterpieces of Hispanic Culture

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

Subject studies major works of Hispanic litera-

ture, film, and art, including the Poem of the
Cid and Cervantes's Don Quijote. Films by
Bufuel, as well as paintings by Velazquez,
among others, allow students to trace develop-
ment of Hispanic culture through focus on
fanaticism, honor, and the grotesque, as well
as on humor as a way to cope creatively with
the world, or to escape from it.

E. Garrels

21F.882 Contemporary US Hispanic
Literature and Film: Lives in Translation
(New)

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: U (Fall)
Acad Year 1997-98: Not offered
3-3-6 HASS

Examines the experience and dilemmas of
Cubans, Mexicans, Puerto Ricans and other
established and immigrant US Hispanic/
Latino groups in works by recent writers and
filmmakers; marginality, transculturation, and
acculturation in works such as Julia Alvarez’s
How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accent, Gloria
Anzaldua’s Borderlands, Sandra Cisneros’s
Woman Hollering Creek, Jesus Colon’s A Puer-
to Rican in New York, Oscar Hijuelos’s The
Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love, and
Richard Rodriguez’s Hunger of Memory. |n-
cludes TV series “I Love Lucy,” and film
Mambo Kings. Conducted in English.

N. Wey-Gomez

21F.884J Introduction to Latin American
Studies

(Same subject as 17.541J, 21A.224J)
Prereq.: —

U (Spring)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 4

Introduction to contemporary reality of multi-
cultural, multi-ethnic peoples of Latin America.
Organized around six topics: indigenous iden-
tity and struggle, nineteenth-century liberalism
and current crisis of the liberal nation-state,
Afro-Americans in Brazil and Cuba,
democratization and worker's movements in
contemporary Brazil, the new urbanization and
women’s activism (case study — Mexico City),
and the Latino-Americanization of the US.
Major emphasis on the period from 1970 to
present but certain units explore historical an-
tecedents as far back as late eighteenth cen-
tury.

M. Diskin, E. Garrels

Descriptions of Subjects 499


--- 06.pdf Page 35 ---
School of Humanities and Social Science

Special Topics

21F.910 Special Topics in Foreign
Languages and Literatures

Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

21F.911 Special Topics in Foreign
Languages and Literatures .

Prereq.: —

U (IAP, Spring)

Units arranged

Can be repeated for credit

Advanced work in foreign languages and litera-

tures for students wishing to pursue topics or
projects not provided for by regular subject of-
ferings. Before registering, student must plan
course of study with appropriate instructor in
the Section and secure the approval of the
Section Head. Normal maximum is 6 units; to
count toward HASS Requirement, 9 units are
required. Exceptional 9-unit projects oc-
casionally approved.

Consult Foreign Languages and Literatures
Headquarters.

For individual research in Foreign Lan-
guages and Literatures, register for

21F.UR or 21F.URG. For Foreign Languages
and Literatures pre-thesis tutorial, register
for 21F.ThT. For undergraduate thesis,
register for 21F.ThU. Descriptions of these
subjects can be found in the beginning of
this section under 21.UR, 21.URG, 21.ThT,
and 21.ThU on page 487.

History

Consult History Headquarters, E51-285, for
the most up-to-date information about
requirements and subject offerings.

American History

Survey Subjects

21H.101 American History to 1865
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS

A basic history of American social, economic,

and political development from the colonial
period through the Civil War. Examines the dif-
ferences between Indians and European set-
tlers; the colonial heritages of Spanish and
British America; the American Revolution and
its impact; the establishment and growth of the
new nation; the Civil War, its background, char-
acter, and impact. Readings are from modern
scholarship as well as writings of the period, in-
cluding those of Winthrop, Paine, Madison,

H. B. Stowe, and Lincoln.

J. Saillant

21H.102 The Emergence of Modern
America, 1865 to the Present

Prereq.: —
U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5

Examines four central issues in the develop-

ment of modern America: the ways in which dif-
ferent groups sought to alter society; the rise
of a strong central government and its effect
on the nation; the impact of the nation’s role as
a superpower on domestic life; and changes in
the lives of Americans from 1865 to the
present. Using primary documents as well as
secondary interpretations, subject explores is-
sues of politics, economics, race, and gender
from Reconstruction to the 1990s.

H. Richardson

21H.103 Family, Work, and Leisure in
America, 1600 to the Present

Prereq.: —
U (Spring)
3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5

An interdisciplinary exploration of changes in

family life, work, and leisure among a diversity
of Americans in four historical contexts — the
pre-industrial North, the antebellum South, the
early twentieth century, and our own time.
Topics include gender roles, transformations in
the organization and meaning of work, the
relationship between private and public life,
and changing ideals and experiences of
leisure.

C. Appy

21H.104J Riots, Strikes, and Conspiracies
in American History

(Same subject as 11.015J)
Prereq.: —

U (Fall)

3-0-9 HASS-D, Category 5

Readings and discussions focusing on a series
of short-term events that shed light on
American culture and social organization. The
events studied in 1995 were the anti-
abolitionist “riot” at Alton, Illinois, in 1837, the
lockout and strike at Homestead, Pennsyl-
vania, in 1892, the uprising at Columbia
University in 1968, and the takeover of Attica
penitentiary in 1971. Emphasis on finding
ways to make sense of these complicated,
highly traumatic events, and on using them to
understand larger processes of change in
American history.

P. Maier, R. M. Fogelson

21H.111 Colonial America

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

North American history to 1763 with particular
attention to the development of society and
politics in the British colonies. Topics include
the British, French, and Spanish empires; in-
surrections, witchcraft, and slavery; economic,
social, and religious change; war, politics, and
political ideology on the eve of the American
Revolution. Readings are drawn from the most
recent historical scholarship as well as docu-
ments of the time.

P. Maier

21H.112 The American Revolution

Prereq.: —

Acad Year 1996-97: Not offered
Acad Year 1997-98: U (Fall)
3-0-9 HASS

English and American backgrounds of the
Revolution; issues and arguments in the Anglo-
American conflict; colonial resistance and the
beginnings of republicanism; the Revolutionary
War; constitution writing for the states and na-
tion; effects of the American Revolution. Con-
cerned primarily with the revolutionary origins
of American government. Readings em-
phasize documents from the period —
pamphlets, correspondence, the minutes or
resolutions of resistance organizations, con-
stitutional documents and debates.

P. Maier

500 Chapter Vill

